The town was in flames.
The narrow streets leading to the moat and the first terrace belched smoke and embers flames devouring the densely clustered thatched houses and licking at the castle walls. From the west from the harbour gate the screams and clamour of vicious battle and the dull blows of a battering ram smashing against the walls grew ever louder.
Their attackers had surrounded them unexpectedly shattering the barricades which had been held by no more than a few soldiers a handful of townsmen carrying halberds and some crossbowmen from the guild. Their horses decked out in flowing black caparisons flew over the barricades like spectres their riders bright glistening blades sowing death amongst the fleeing defenders.
Ciri felt the knight who carried her before him on his saddle abruptly spur his horse. She heard his cry. Hold on he shouted. Hold on!
Other knights wearing the colours of Cintra overtook them sparring even in full flight with the Nilfgaardians. Ciri caught a glimpse of the skirmish from the corner of her eye – the crazed swirl of blue-gold and black cloaks amidst the clash of steel the clatter of blades against shields the neighing of horses—
Shouts. No not shouts. Screams.
Hold on!
Fear. With every jolt every jerk every leap of the horse pain shot through her hands as she clutched at the reins. Her legs contracted painfully unable to find support her eyes watered from the smoke. The arm around her suffocated her choking her the force compressing her ribs. All around her screaming such as she had never before heard grew louder. What must one do to a man to make him scream so?
Fear. Overpowering paralysing choking fear.
Again the clash of iron the grunts and snorts of the horses. The houses whirled around her and suddenly she could see windows belching fire where a moment before thered been nothing but a muddy little street strewn with corpses and cluttered with the abandoned possessions of the fleeing population. All at once the knight at her back was wracked by a strange wheezing cough. Blood spurted over the hands grasping the reins. More screams. Arrows whistled past.
A fall a shock painful bruising against armour. Hooves pounded past her a horses belly and a frayed girth flashing by above her head then another horses belly and a flowing black caparison. Grunts of exertion like a lumberjacks when chopping wood. But this isnt wood; its iron against iron. A shout muffled and dull and something huge and black collapsed into the mud next to her with a splash spurting blood. An armoured foot quivered thrashed goring the earth with an enormous spur.
A jerk. Some force plucked her up pulled her onto another saddle. Hold on! Again the bone-shaking speed the mad gallop. Arms and legs desperately searching for support. The horse rears. Hold on!… There is no support. There is no… There is no… There is blood. The horse falls. Its impossible to jump aside no way to break free to escape the tight embrace of these chainmail-clad arms. There is no way to avoid the blood pouring onto her head and over her shoulders.
A jolt the squelch of mud a violent collision with the ground horrifically still after the furious ride. The horses harrowing wheezes and squeals as it tries to regain its feet. The pounding of horseshoes fetlocks and hooves flashing past. Black caparisons and cloaks. Shouting.
The street is on fire a roaring red wall of flame. Silhouetted before it a rider towers over the flaming roofs enormous. His black-caparisoned horse prances tosses its head neighs.
The rider stares down at her. Ciri sees his eyes gleaming through the slit in his huge helmet framed by a bird of preys wings. She sees the fire reflected in the broad blade of the sword held in his lowered hand.
The rider looks at her. Ciri is unable to move. The dead mans motionless arms wrapped around her waist hold her down. She is locked in place by something heavy and wet with blood something which is lying across her thigh pinning her to the ground.
And she is frozen in fear: a terrible fear which turns her entrails inside out which deafens Ciri to the screams of the wounded horse the roar of the blaze the cries of dying people and the pounding drums. The only thing which exists which counts which still has any meaning is fear. Fear embodied in the figure of a black knight wearing a helmet decorated with feathers frozen against the wall of raging red flames.
The rider spurs his horse the wings on his helmet fluttering as the bird of prey takes to flight launching itself to attack its helpless victim paralysed with fear. The bird – or maybe the knight – screeches terrifyingly cruelly triumphantly. A black horse black armour a black flowing cloak and behind this – flames. A sea of flames.
Fear.
The bird shrieks. The wings beat feathers slap against her face. Fear!
Help! Why doesnt anyone help me? Alone weak helpless – I cant move cant force a sound from my constricted throat. Why does no one come to help me?
Im terrified!
Eyes blaze through the slit in the huge winged helmet. The black cloak veils everything—
Ciri!
She woke numb and drenched in sweat with her scream – the scream which had woken her – still hanging in the air still vibrating somewhere within her beneath her breast-bone and burning against her parched throat. Her hands ached clenched around the blanket; her back ached…
Ciri. Calm down.
The night was dark and windy the crowns of the surrounding pine trees rustling steadily and melodiously their limbs and trunks creaking in the wind. There was no malevolent fire no screams only this gentle lullaby. Beside her the campfire flickered with light and warmth its reflected flames glowing from harness buckles gleaming red in the leather-wrapped and iron-banded hilt of a sword leaning against a saddle on the ground. There was no other fire and no other iron. The hand against her cheek smelled of leather and ashes. Not of blood.
Geralt—
It was just a dream. A bad dream.
Ciri shuddered violently curling her arms and legs up tight.
A dream. Just a dream.
The campfire had already died down; the birch logs were red and luminous occasionally crackling giving off tiny spurts of blue flame which illuminated the white hair and sharp profile of the man wrapping a blanket and sheepskin around her.
Geralt I—
Im right here. Sleep Ciri. You have to rest. Weve still a long way ahead of us.
I can hear music she thought suddenly. Amidst the rustling of the trees… theres music. Lute music. And voices. The Princess of Cintra… A child of destiny… A child of Elder Blood the blood of elves. Geralt of Rivia the White Wolf and his destiny. No no thats a legend. A poets invention. The princess is dead. She was killed in the town streets while trying to escape…
Hold on… !Hold…
Geralt?
What Ciri?
What did he do to me? What happened? What did he… do to me?
Who?
The knight… The black knight with feathers on his helmet… I cant remember anything. He shouted… and looked at me. I cant remember what happened. Only that I was frightened… I was so frightened…
The man leaned over her the flame of the campfire sparkling in his eyes. They were strange eyes. Very strange. Ciri had been frightened of them she hadnt liked meeting his gaze. But that had been a long time ago. A very long time ago.
I cant remember anything she whispered searching for his hand as tough and coarse as raw wood. The black knight—
It was a dream. Sleep peacefully. It wont come back.
Ciri had heard such reassurances in the past. They had been repeated to her endlessly; many many times she had been offered comforting words when her screams had woken her during the night. But this time it was different. Now she believed it. Because it was Geralt of Rivia the White Wolf the Witcher who said it. The man who was her destiny. The one for whom she was destined. Geralt the Witcher who had found her surrounded by war death and despair who had taken her with him and promised they would never part.
She fell asleep holding tight to his hand.
The bard finished the song. Tilting his head a little he repeated the ballads refrain on his lute delicately softly a single tone higher than the apprentice accompanying him.
No one said a word. Nothing but the subsiding music and the whispering leaves and squeaking boughs of the enormous oak could be heard. Then all of a sudden a goat tethered to one of the carts which circled the ancient tree bleated lengthily. At that moment as if given a signal one of the men seated in the large semi-circular audience stood up. Throwing his cobalt blue cloak with gold braid trim back over his shoulder he gave a stiff dignified bow.
Thank you Master Dandilion he said his voice resonant without being loud. Allow me Radcliffe of Oxenfurt Master of the Arcana to express what I am sure is the opinion of everyone here present and utter words of gratitude and appreciation for your fine art and skill.
The wizard ran his gaze over those assembled – an audience of well over a hundred people – seated on the ground on carts or standing in a tight semi-circle facing the foot of the oak. They nodded and whispered amongst themselves. Several people began to applaud while others greeted the singer with upraised hands. Women touched by the music sniffed and wiped their eyes on whatever came to hand which differed according to their standing profession and wealth: peasant women used their forearms or the backs of their hands merchants wives dabbed their eyes with linen handkerchiefs while elves and noblewomen used kerchiefs of the finest tight-woven cotton and Baron Viliberts three daughters who had along with the rest of his retinue halted their falcon hunt to attend the famous troubadours performance blew their noses loudly and sonorously into elegant mould-green cashmere scarves.
It would not be an exaggeration to say continued the wizard that you have moved us deeply Master Dandilion. You have prompted us to reflection and thought; you have stirred our hearts. Allow me to express our gratitude and our respect.
The troubadour stood and took a bow sweeping the heron feather pinned to his fashionable hat across his knees. His apprentice broke off his playing grinned and bowed too until Dandilion glared at him sternly and snapped something under his breath. The boy lowered his head and returned to softly strumming his lute strings.
The assembly stirred to life. The merchants travelling in the caravan whispered amongst themselves and then rolled a sizable cask of beer out to the foot of the oak tree. Wizard Radcliffe lost himself in quiet conversation with Baron Vilibert. Having blown their noses the barons daughters gazed at Dandilion in adoration – which went entirely unnoticed by the bard engrossed as he was in smiling winking and flashing his teeth at a haughty silent group of roving elves and at one of them in particular: a dark-haired large-eyed beauty sporting a tiny ermine cap. Dandilion had rivals for her attention – the elf with her huge eyes and beautiful toque hat had caught his audiences interest as well and a number of knights students and goliards were paying court to her with their eyes. The elf clearly enjoyed the attention picking at the lace cuffs of her chemise and fluttering her eyelashes but the group of elves with her surrounded her on all sides not bothering to hide their antipathy towards her admirers.
The glade beneath Bleobheris the great oak was a place of frequent rallies a well-known travellers resting place and meeting ground for wanderers and was famous for its tolerance and openness. The druids protecting the ancient tree called it the Seat of Friendship and willingly welcomed all comers. But even during an event as exceptional as the world-famous troubadours just-concluded performance the travellers kept to themselves remaining in clearly delineated groups. Elves stayed with elves. Dwarfish craftsmen gathered with their kin who were often hired to protect the merchant caravans and were armed to the teeth. Their groups tolerated at best the gnome miners and halfling farmers who camped beside them. All non-humans were uniformly distant towards humans. The humans repaid in kind but were not seen to mix amongst themselves either. Nobility looked down on the merchants and travelling salesmen with open scorn while soldiers and mercenaries distanced themselves from shepherds and their reeking sheepskins. The few wizards and their disciples kept themselves entirely apart from the others and bestowed their arrogance on everyone in equal parts. A tight-knit dark and silent group of peasants lurked in the background. Resembling a forest with their rakes pitchforks and flails poking above their heads they were ignored by all and sundry.
The exception as ever was the children. Freed from the constraints of silence which had been enforced during the bards performance the children dashed into the woods with wild cries and enthusiastically immersed themselves in a game whose rules were incomprehensible to all those who had bidden farewell to the happy years of childhood. Children of elves dwarves halflings gnomes half-elves quarter-elves and toddlers of mysterious provenance neither knew nor recognised racial or social divisions. At least not yet.
Indeed! shouted one of the knights present in the glade who was as thin as a beanpole and wearing a red and black tunic emblazoned with three lions passant. The wizard speaks the truth! The ballads were beautiful. Upon my word honourable Dandilion if you ever pass near Baldhorn my lords castle stop by without a moments hesitation. You will be welcomed like a prince– what am I saying? Welcomed like King Vizimir himself! I swear on my sword I have heard many a minstrel but none even came close to being your equal master. Accept the respect and tributes those of us born to knighthood and those of us appointed to the position pay to your skills!
Flawlessly sensing the opportune moment the troubadour winked at his apprentice. The boy set his lute aside and picked up a little casket which served as a collection box for the audiences more measurable expressions of appreciation. He hesitated ran his eyes over the crowd then replaced the little casket and grabbed a large bucket standing nearby. Master Dandilion bestowed an approving smile on the young man for his prudence.
Master! shouted a sizeable woman sitting on a cart the sides of which were painted with a sign for Vera Loewenhaupt and Sons and which was full of wickerwork. Her sons nowhere to be seen were no doubt busy wasting away their mothers hard-earned fortune. Master Dandilion what is this? Are you going to leave us in suspense? That cant be the end of your ballad? Sing to us of what happened next!
Songs and ballads – the musician bowed – never end dear lady because poetry is eternal and immortal it knows no beginning it knows no end—
But what happened next? The tradeswoman didnt give up generously rattling coins into the bucket Dandilions apprentice held out to her. At least tell us about it even if you have no wish to sing of it. Your songs mention no names but we know the witcher you sing of is no other than the famous Geralt of Rivia and the enchantress for whom he burns with love is the equally famous Yennefer. And the Child Surprise destined for the witcher and sworn to him from birth is Cirilla the unfortunate Princess of Cintra the town destroyed by the Invaders. Am I right?
Dandilion smiled remaining enigmatic and aloof. I sing of universal matters my dear generous lady he stated. Of emotions which anyone can experience. Not about specific people.
Oh come on! yelled a voice from the crowd. Everyone knows those songs are about Geralt the Witcher!
Yes yes! squealed Baron Viliberts daughters in chorus drying their sodden scarves. Sing on Master Dandilion! What happened next? Did the witcher and Yennefer the Enchantress find each other in the end? And did they love each other? Were they happy? We want to know!
Enough! roared the dwarf leader with a growl in his throat shaking his mighty waist-length red beard. Its crap – all these princesses sorceresses destiny love and womens fanciful tales. If youll pardon the expression great poet its all lies just a poetic invention to make the story prettier and more touching. But of the deeds of war – the massacre and plunder of Cintra the battles of Marnadal and Sodden – you did sing that mightily Dandilion! Theres no regrets in parting with silver for such a song a joy to a warriors heart! And I Sheldon Skaggs declare theres not an ounce of lies in what you say – and I can tell the lies from the truth because I was there at Sodden. I stood against the Nilfgaard invaders with an axe in my hand…
I Donimir of Troy shouted the thin knight with three lions passant blazoned across his tunic was at both battles of Sodden! But I did not see you there sir dwarf!
No doubt because you were looking after the supply train! Sheldon Skaggs retorted. While I was in the front line where things got hot!
Mind your tongue beardy! said Donimir of Troy flushing hitching up his sword belt. And who youre speaking to!
Have a care yourself! The dwarf whacked his palm against the axe wedged in his belt turned to his companions and grinned. Did you see him there? Frigging knight! See his coat of arms? Ha! Three lions on a shield? Two shitting and the third snarling!
Peace peace! A grey-haired druid in a white cloak averted trouble with a sharp authoritative voice. This is not fitting gentlemen! Not here under Bleobheris crown an oak older than all the disputes and quarrels of the world! And not in Poet Dandilions presence from whose ballads we ought to learn of love not contention.
Quite so! a short fat priest with a face glistening with sweat seconded the druid. You look but have no eyes you listen but have deaf ears. Because divine love is not in you you are like empty barrels—
Speaking of barrels squeaked a long-nosed gnome from his cart painted with a sign for Iron hardware manufacture and sale roll another out guildsmen! Poet Dandilions throat is surely dry – and ours too from all these emotions!
—Verily like empty barrels I tell ye! The priest determined not to be put off drowned out the ironware gnome. You have understood nothing of Master Dandilions ballad you have learned nothing! You did not see that these ballads speak of mans fate that we are no more than toys in the hands of the gods our lands no more than their playground. The ballads about destiny portrayed the destinies of us all and the legend of Geralt the Witcher and Princess Cirilla – although it is set against the true background of that war – is after all a mere metaphor the creation of a poets imagination designed to help us—
Youre talking rubbish holy man! hollered Vera Loewenhaupt from the heights of her cart. What legend? What imaginative creation? You may not know him but I know Geralt of Rivia. I saw him with my own eyes in Wyzima when he broke the spell on King Foltests daughter. And I met him again later on the Merchants Trail where at Gildias request he slew a ferocious griffin which was preying on the caravans and thus saved the lives of many good people. No. This is no legend or fairy-tale. It is the truth the sincere truth which Master Dandilion sang for us.
I second that said a slender female warrior with her black hair smoothly brushed back and plaited into a thick braid. I Rayla of Lyria also know Geralt the White Wolf the famous slayer of monsters. And Ive met the enchantress Lady Yennefer on several occasions – I used to visit Aedirn and her home town of Vengerberg. I dont know anything about their being in love though.
But it has to be true the attractive elf in the ermine toque suddenly said in a melodious voice. Such a beautiful ballad of love could not but be true.
It could not! Baron Viliberts daughters supported the elf and as if on command wiped their eyes on their scarves. Not by any measure!
Honourable wizard! Vera Loewenhaupt turned to Radcliffe. Were they in love or not? Surely you know what truly happened to them Yennefer and the witcher. Disclose the secret!
If the song says they were in love replied the wizard then thats what happened and their love will endure down the ages. Such is the power of poetry.
It is said interrupted Baron Vilibert all of a sudden that Yennefer of Vengerberg was killed on Sodden Hill. Several enchantresses were killed there—
Thats not true said Donimir of Troy. Her name is not on the monument. I am from those parts and have often climbed Sodden Hill and read the names engraved on the monument. Three enchantresses died there: Triss Merigold Lytta Neyd known as Coral… hmm… and the name of the third has slipped my mind…
The knight glanced at Wizard Radcliffe who smiled wordlessly.
And this witcher Sheldon Skaggs suddenly called out this Geralt who loved Yennefer has also bitten the dust apparently. I heard he was killed somewhere in Transriver. He slew and slew monsters until he met his match. Thats how it goes: he who fights with the sword dies by the sword. Everyone comes across someone who will better them eventually and is made to taste cold hard iron.
I dont believe it. The slender warrior contorted her pale lips spat vehemently on the ground and crossed her chainmail-clad arms with a crunch. I dont believe there is anyone to best Geralt of Rivia. I have seen this witcher handle a sword. His speed is simply inhuman—
Well said threw in Wizard Radcliffe. Inhuman. Witchers are mutated so their reactions—
I dont understand you magician. The warrior twisted her lips even more nastily. Your words are too learned. I know one thing: no swordsman I have ever seen can match Geralt of Rivia the White Wolf. And so I will not accept that he was defeated in battle as the dwarf claims.
Every swordsmans an arse when the enemys not sparse remarked Sheldon Skaggs sententiously. As the elves say.
Elves stated a tall fair-haired representative of the Elder Race coldly from his place beside the elf with the beautiful toque are not in the habit of using such vulgar language.
No! No! squealed Baron Viliberts daughters from behind their green scarves. Geralt the Witcher cant have been killed! The witcher found Ciri the child destined for him and then the Enchantress Yennefer and all three lived happily ever after! Isnt that true Master Dandilion?
Twas a ballad my noble young ladies said the beer-parched gnome manufacturer of ironwares with a yawn. Why look for truth in a ballad? Truth is one thing poetry another. Lets take this – what was her name? – Ciri? The famous Child Surprise. Master Dandilion trumped that up for sure. Ive been to Cintra many a time and the king and queen lived in a childless home with no daughter no son—
Liar! shouted a red-haired man in a sealskin jacket a checked kerchief bound around his forehead. Queen Calanthe the Lioness of Cintra had a daughter called Pavetta. She died together with her husband in a tempest which struck out at sea and the depths swallowed them both.
So you see for yourselves Im not making this up! The ironware gnome called everyone to be his witnesses. The Princess of Cintra was called Pavetta not Ciri.
Cirilla known as Ciri was the daughter of this drowned Pavetta explained the red-haired man. Calanthes granddaughter. She was not the princess herself but the daughter of the Princess of Cintra. She was the Child Surprise destined for the witcher the man to whom – even before she was born – the queen had sworn to hand her granddaughter over just as Master Dandilion has sung. But the witcher could neither find her nor collect her. And here our poet has missed the truth.
Oh yes hes missed the truth indeed butted in a sinewy young man who judging by his clothes was a journeyman on his travels prior to crafting his masterpiece and passing his masters exams. The witchers destiny bypassed him: Cirilla was killed during the siege of Cintra. Before throwing herself from the tower Queen Calanthe killed the princesss daughter with her own hand to prevent her from falling into the Nilfgaardians claws alive.
It wasnt like that. Not like that at all! objected the red-haired man. The princesss daughter was killed during the massacre while trying to escape from the town.
One way or another shouted Ironware the witcher didnt find Cirilla! The poet lied!
But lied beautifully said the elf in the toque snuggling up to the tall fair-haired elf.
Its not a question of poetry but of facts! shouted the journeyman. I tell you the princesss daughter died by her grandmothers hand. Anyone whos been to Cintra can confirm that!
And I say she was killed in the streets trying to escape declared the red-haired man. I know because although Im not from Cintra I served in the Earl of Skelliges troop supporting Cintra during the war. As everyone knows Eist Tuirseach the King of Cintra comes from the Skellige Isles. He was the earls uncle. I fought in the earls troop at Marnadal and Cintra and later after the defeat at Sodden—
Yet another veteran Sheldon Skaggs snarled to the dwarves crowded around him. All heroes and warriors. Hey folks! Is there at least one of you out there who didnt fight at Marnadal or Sodden?
That dig is out of place Skaggs the tall elf reproached him putting his arm around the beauty wearing the toque in a way intended to dispel any lingering doubts amongst her admirers. Dont imagine you were the only one to fight at Sodden. I took part in the battle as well.
On whose side I wonder Baron Vilibert said to Radcliffe in a highly audible whisper which the elf ignored entirely.
As everyone knows he continued sparing neither the baron nor the wizard so much as a glance over a hundred thousand warriors stood on the field during the second battle of Sodden Hill and of those at least thirty thousand were maimed or killed. Master Dandilion should be thanked for immortalising this famous terrible battle in one of his ballads. In both the lyrics and melody of his work I heard not an exaltation but a warning. So I repeat: offer praise and everlasting renown to this poet for his ballad which may perhaps prevent a tragedy as horrific as this cruel and unnecessary war from occurring in the future.
Indeed said Baron Vilibert looking defiantly at the elf. You have read some very interesting things into this ballad honoured sir. An unnecessary war you say? Youd like to avoid such a tragedy in the future would you? Are we to understand that if the Nilfgaardians were to attack us again you would advise that we capitulate? Humbly accept the Nilfgaardian yoke?
Life is a priceless gift and should be protected the elf replied coldly. Nothing justifies wide-scale slaughter and sacrifice of life which is what the battles at Sodden were – both the battle lost and the battle won. Both of them cost the humans thousands of lives. And with them you lost unimaginable potential—
Elven prattle! snarled Sheldon Skaggs. Dim-witted rubbish! It was the price that had to be paid to allow others to live decently in peace instead of being chained blinded whipped and forced to work in salt and sulphur mines. Those who died a heroic death those who will now thanks to Dandilion live on forever in our memories taught us to defend our own homes. Sing your ballads Dandilion sing them to everyone. Your lesson wont go to waste and itll come in handy youll see! Because mark my words Nilfgaard will attack us again. If not today then tomorrow! Theyre licking their wounds now recovering but the day when well see their black cloaks and feathered helmets again is growing ever nearer!
What do they want from us? yelled Vera Loewenhaupt. Why are they bent on persecuting us? Why dont they leave us in peace leave us to our lives and work? What do the Nilfgaardians want?
They want our blood! howled Baron Vilibert.
And our land! someone cried from the crowd of peasants.
And our women! chimed in Sheldon Skaggs with a ferocious glower.
Several people started to laugh – as quietly and furtively as they could. Even though the idea that anyone other than another dwarf would desire one of the exceptionally unattractive dwarf-women was highly amusing it was not a safe subject for teasing or jests – especially not in the presence of the short stocky bearded individuals whose axes and short-swords had an ugly habit of leaping from their belts and into their hands at incredible speed. And the dwarves for some unknown reason were entirely convinced that the rest of the world was lecherously lying in wait for their wives and daughters and were extremely touchy about it.
This had to happen at some point the grey-haired druid declared suddenly. This had to happen. We forgot that we are not the only ones in this world that the whole of creation does not revolve around us. Like stupid fat lazy minnows in a slimy pond we chose not to accept the existence of pike. We allowed our world like the pond to become slimy boggy and sluggish. Look around you – there is crime and sin everywhere greed the pursuit of profit quarrels and disagreements are rife. Our traditions are disappearing respect for our values is fading. Instead of living according to Nature we have begun to destroy it. And what have we got for it? The air is poisoned by the stink of smelting furnaces the rivers and brooks are tainted by slaughter houses and tanneries forests are being cut down without a thought… Ha – just look! – even on the living bark of sacred Bleobheris there just above the poets head theres a foul phrase carved out with a knife – and its misspelled at that – by a stupid illiterate vandal. Why are you surprised? It had to end badly—
Yes yes! the fat priest joined in. Come to your senses you sinners while there is still time because the anger and vengeance of the gods hangs over you! Remember Ithlins oracle the prophetic words describing the punishment of the gods reserved for a tribe poisoned by crime! The Time of Contempt will come when the tree will lose its leaves the bud will wither the fruit will rot the seed turn bitter and the river valleys will run with ice instead of water. The White Chill will come and after it the White Light and the world will perish beneath blizzards. Thus spoke Seeress Ithlin! And before this comes to pass there will be visible signs plagues will ravish the earth – Remember! – the Nilfgaard are our punishment from the gods! They are the whip with which the Immortals will lash you sinners so that you may—
Shut up you sanctimonious old man! roared Sheldon Skaggs stamping his heavy boots. Your superstitious rot makes me sick! My guts are churning—
Careful Sheldon. The tall elf cut him short with a smile. Dont mock anothers religion. It is not pleasant polite or… safe.
Im not mocking anything protested the dwarf. I dont doubt the existence of the gods but it annoys me when someone drags them into earthly matters and tries to pull the wool over my eyes using the prophecies of some crazy elf. The Nilfgaardians are the instrument of the gods? Rubbish! Search back through your memories to the past to the days of Dezmod Radowid and Sambuk to the days of Abrad the Old Oak! You may not remember them because your lives are so very short – youre like Mayflies – but I remember and Ill tell you what it was like in these lands just after you climbed from your boats on the Yaruga Estuary and the Pontar Delta onto the beach. Three kingdoms sprang from the four ships which beached on those shores; the stronger groups absorbed the weaker and so grew strengthening their positions. They invaded others territories conquered them and their kingdoms expanded becoming ever larger and more powerful. And now the Nilfgaardians are doing the same because theirs is a strong and united disciplined and tightly knit country. And unless you close ranks in the same way Nilfgaard will swallow you as a pike does a minnow – just as this wise druid said!
Let them just try! Donimir of Troy puffed out his lion-emblazoned chest and shook his sword in its scabbard. We beat them hollow on Sodden Hill and we can do it again!
Youre very cocksure snarled Sheldon Skaggs. Youve evidently forgotten sir knight that before the battle of Sodden Hill the Nilfgaard had advanced across your lands like an iron roller strewing the land between Marnadal and Transriver with the corpses of many a gallant fellow like yourself. And it wasnt loud-mouthed smart-arses like you who stopped the Nilfgaardians but the united strengths of Temeria Redania Aedirn and Kaedwen. Concord and unity thats what stopped them!
Not just that remarked Radcliffe in a cold resonant voice. Not just that Master Skaggs.
The dwarf hawked loudly blew his nose shuffled his feet then bowed a little to the wizard.
No one is denying the contribution of your fellowship he said. Shame on he who does not acknowledge the heroism of the brotherhood of wizards on Sodden Hill. They stood their ground bravely shed blood for the common cause and contributed most eminently to our victory. Dandilion did not forget them in his ballad and nor shall we. But note that these wizards stood united and loyal on the Hill and accepted the leadership of Vilgefortz of Roggeveen just as we the warriors of the Four Kingdoms acknowledged the command of Vizimir of Redania. Its just a pity this solidarity and concord only lasted for the duration of the war because with peace here we are divided again. Vizimir and Foltest are choking each other with customs taxes and trading laws Demawend of Aedirn is bickering with Henselt over the Northern Marches while the League of Hengfors and the Thyssenids of Kovir dont give a toss. And I hear that looking for the old concord amongst the wizards is useless too. We are not closely knit we have no discipline and no unity. But Nilfgaard does!
Nilfgaard is ruled by Emperor Emhyr var Emreis a tyrant and autocrat who enforces obedience with whip noose and axe! thundered Baron Vilibert. What are you proposing sir dwarf? How are we supposed to close ranks? With similar tyranny? And which king which kingdom in your opinion should subordinate the others? In whose hands would you like to see the sceptre and knout?
What do I care? replied Skaggs with a shrug. Thats a human affair. Whoever you chose to be king wouldnt be a dwarf anyway.
Or an elf or even half-elf added the tall representative of the Elder Race his arm still wrapped around the toque-wearing beauty. You even consider quarter-elves inferior—
Thats where it stings laughed Vilibert. Youre blowing the same horn as Nilfgaard because Nilfgaard is also shouting about equality promising you a return to the old order as soon as weve been conquered and theyve scythed us off these lands. Thats the sort of unity the sort of equality youre dreaming of the sort youre talking about and trumpeting! Nilfgaard pays you gold to do it! And its hardly surprising you love each other so much the Nilfgaardians being an elven race—
Nonsense the elf said coldly. You talk rubbish sir knight. Youre clearly blinded by racism. The Nilfgaardians are human just like you.
Thats an outright lie! Theyre descended from the Black Seidhe and everyone knows it! Elven blood flows through their veins! The blood of elves!
And what flows through yours? The elf smiled derisively. Weve been combining our blood for generations for centuries your race and mine and doing so quite successfully – fortunately or unfortunately I dont know. You started persecuting mixed relationships less than a quarter of a century ago and incidentally not very successfully. So show me a human now who hasnt a dash of Seidhe Ichaer the blood of the Elder Race.
Vilibert visibly turned red. Vera Loewenhaupt also flushed. Wizard Radcliffe bowed his head and coughed. And most interestingly the beautiful elf in the ermine toque blushed too.
We are all children of Mother Earth. The grey-haired druids voice resounded in the silence. We are children of Mother Nature. And though we do not respect our mother though we often worry her and cause her pain though we break her heart she loves us. Loves us all. Let us remember that we who are assembled here in this Seat of Friendship. And let us not bicker over which of us was here first: Acorn was the first to be thrown up by the waves and from Acorn sprouted the Great Bleobheris the oldest of oaks. Standing beneath its crown amongst its primordial roots let us not forget our own brotherly roots the earth from which these roots grow. Let us remember the words of Poet Dandilions song—
Exactly! exclaimed Vera Loewenhaupt. And where is he?
Hes fled ascertained Sheldon Skaggs gazing at the empty place under the oak. Taken the money and fled without saying goodbye. Very elf-like!
Dwarf-like! squealed Ironware.
Human-like corrected the tall elf and the beauty in the toque rested her head against his shoulder.
Hey minstrel said Mama Lantieri striding into the room without knocking the scents of hyacinths sweat beer and smoked bacon wafting before her. Youve got a guest. Enter noble gentleman.
Dandilion smoothed his hair and sat up in the enormous carved armchair. The two girls sitting on his lap quickly jumped up covering their charms and pulling down their disordered clothes. The modesty of harlots thought the poet was not at all a bad title for a ballad. He got to his feet fastened his belt and pulled on his doublet all the while looking at the nobleman standing at the threshold.
Indeed he remarked you know how to find me anywhere though you rarely pick an opportune moment. Youre lucky Id not yet decided which of these two beauties I prefer. And at your prices Lantieri I cannot afford them both.
Mama Lantieri smiled in sympathy and clapped her hands. Both girls – a fair-skinned freckled islander and a dark-haired half-elf – swiftly left the room. The man at the door removed his cloak and handed it to Mama along with a small but well-filled money-bag.
Forgive me master he said approaching the table and making himself comfortable. I know this is not a good time to disturb you. But you disappeared out from beneath the oak so quickly… I did not catch you on the High Road as I had intended and did not immediately come across your tracks in this little town. Ill not take much of your time believe me—
They always say that and its always a lie the bard interrupted. Leave us alone Lantieri and see to it that were not disturbed. Im listening sir.
The man scrutinised him. He had dark damp almost tearful eyes a pointed nose and ugly narrow lips.
Ill come to the point without wasting your time he declared waiting for the door to close behind Mama. Your ballads interest me master. To be more specific certain characters of which you sang interest me. I am concerned with the true fate of your ballads heroes. If I am not mistaken the true destinies of real people inspired the beautiful work I heard beneath the oak tree? I have in mind… Little Cirilla of Cintra. Queen Calanthes granddaughter.
Dandilion gazed at the ceiling drumming his fingers on the table.
Honoured sir he said dryly you are interested in strange matters. You ask strange questions. Something tells me you are not the person I took you to be.
And who did you take me to be if I may ask?
Im not sure you may. It depends if you are about to convey greetings to me from any mutual friends. You should have done so initially but somehow you have forgotten.
I did not forget at all. The man reached into the breast pocket of his sepia-coloured velvet tunic and pulled out a money-bag somewhat larger than the one he had handed the procuress but just as well-filled which clinked as it touched the table. We simply have no mutual friends Dandilion. But might this purse not suffice to mitigate the lack?
And what do you intend to buy with this meagre purse? The troubadour pouted. Mama Lantieris entire brothel and all the land surrounding it?
Let us say that I intend to support the arts. And an artist. In order to chat with the artist about his work.
You love art so much do you dear sir? Is it so vital for you to talk to an artist that you press money on him before youve even introduced yourself and in doing so break the most elementary rules of courtesy?
At the beginning of our conversation – the strangers dark eyes narrowed imperceptibly – my anonymity did not bother you.
And now it is starting to.
I am not ashamed of my name said the man a faint smile appearing on his narrow lips. I am called Rience. You do not know me Master Dandilion and that is no surprise. You are too famous and well known to know all of your admirers. Yet everyone who admires your talents feels he knows you knows you so well that a certain degree of familiarity is permissible. This applies to me too. I know it is a misconception so please graciously forgive me.
I graciously forgive you.
Then I can count on you agreeing to answer a few questions—
No! No you cannot interrupted the poet putting on airs. Now if you will graciously forgive me I am not willing to discuss the subjects of my work its inspiration or its characters fictitious or otherwise. To do so would deprive poetry of its poetic veneer and lead to triteness.
Is that so?
It certainly is. For example if having sung the ballad about the millers merry wife I were to announce its really about Zvirka Miller Loachs wife and I included an announcement that Zvirka can most easily be bedded every Thursday because on Thursdays the miller goes to market it would no longer be poetry. It would be either rhyming couplets or foul slander.
I understand I understand Rience said quickly. But perhaps that is a bad example. I am not after all interested in anyones peccadilloes or sins. You will not slander anyone by answering my questions. All I need is one small piece of information: what really happened to Cirilla the Queen of Cintras granddaughter? Many people claim she was killed during the siege of the town; there are even eye-witnesses to support the claim. From your ballad however it would appear that the child survived. I am truly interested to know if this is your imagination at work or the truth? True or false?
Im extremely pleased youre so interested. Dandilion smiled broadly. You may laugh Master whatever-your-name-is but that was precisely what I intended when I composed the ballad. I wished to excite my listeners and arouse their curiosity.
True or false? repeated Rience coldly.
If I were to give that away I would destroy the impact of my work. Goodbye my friend. You have used up all the time I can spare you. And two of my many inspirations are waiting out there wondering which of them I will choose.
Rience remained silent for a long while making no move to leave. He stared at the poet with his unfriendly moist eyes and the poet felt a growing unease. A merry din came from the bawdy-houses main room punctuated from time to time by high-pitched feminine giggles. Dandilion turned his head away pretending to show derisive haughtiness but in fact he was judging the distance to the corner of the room and the tapestry showing a nymph sprinkling her breasts with water poured from a jug.
Dandilion Rience finally spoke slipping his hand back into the pocket of his sepia-coloured tunic answer my questions. Please. I have to know the answer. Its incredibly important to me. To you too believe me because if you answer of your own free will then—
Then what?
A hide-ous grimace crept over Riences narrow lips.
Then I wont have to force you to speak.
Now listen you scoundrel. Dandilion stood up and pretended to pull a threatening face. I loathe violence and force but Im going to call Mama Lantieri in a minute and she will call a certain Gruzila who fulfils the honourable and responsible role of bouncer in this establishment. He is a true artist in his field. Hell kick your arse so hard youll soar over the town roofs with such magnificence that the few people passing by at this hour will take you for a Pegasus.
Rience made an abrupt gesture and something glistened in his hand.
Are you sure he asked youll have time to call her?
Dandilion had no intention of checking if he would have time. Nor did he intend to wait. Before the stiletto had locked in Riences hand Dandilion had taken a long leap to the corner of the room dived under the nymph tapestry kicked open a secret door and rushed headlong down the winding stairs nimbly steering himself with the aid of the well-worn banisters. Rience darted after him but the poet was sure of himself – he knew the secret passage like the back of his hand having used it numerous times to flee creditors jealous husbands and furious rivals from whom he had from time to time stolen rhymes and tunes. He knew that after the third turning he would be able to grope for a revolving door behind which there was a ladder leading down to the cellar. He was sure that his persecutor would be unable to stop in time would run on and step on a trapdoor through which he would fall and land in the pigsty. He was equally sure that – bruised covered in shit and mauled by the pigs – his persecutor would give up the chase.
Dandilion was mistaken as was usually the case whenever he was too confident. Something flashed a sudden blue behind his back and the poet felt his limbs grow numb lifeless and stiff. He couldnt slow down for the revolving door his legs wouldnt obey him. He yelled and rolled down the stairs bumping against the walls of the little corridor. The trapdoor opened beneath him with a dry crack and the troubadour tumbled down into the darkness and stench. Before thumping his head on the dirt floor and losing consciousness he remembered Mama Lantieri saying something about the pigsty being repaired.
The pain in his constricted wrists and shoulders cruelly twisted in their joints brought him back to his senses. He wanted to scream but couldnt; it felt as though his mouth had been stuck up with clay. He was kneeling on the dirt floor with a creaking rope hauling him up by his wrists. He tried to stand wanting to ease the pressure on his shoulders but his legs too were tied together. Choking and suffocating he somehow struggled to his feet helped considerably by the rope which tugged mercilessly at him.
Rience was standing in front of him and his evil eyes glinted in the light of a lantern held aloft by an unshaven ruffian who stood over six feet tall. Another ruffian probably no shorter stood behind him. Dandilion could hear his breathing and caught a whiff of stale sweat. It was the reeking man who tugged on the rope looped over a roof beam and fastened to the poets wrists.
Dandilions feet tore off the dirt floor. The poet whistled through his nose unable to do anything more.
Enough Rience snapped at last – he spoke almost immediately yet it had seemed an age to Dandilion. The bards feet touched the ground but despite his most heart-felt desire he could not kneel again – the tight drawn rope was still holding him as taut as a string.
Rience came closer. There was not even a trace of emotion on his face; the damp eyes had not changed their expression in the least. His tone of voice too remained calm quiet even a little bored.
You nasty rhymester. You runt. You scum. You arrogant nobody. You tried to run from me? No one has escaped me yet. We havent finished our conversation you clown you sheeps head. I asked you a question under much pleasanter circumstances than these. Now you are going to answer all my questions and in far less pleasant circumstances. Am I right?
Dandilion nodded eagerly. Only now did Rience smile and make a sign. The bard squealed helplessly feeling the rope tighten and his arms twisted backwards cracking in their joints.
You cant talk Rience confirmed still smiling loathsomely and it hurts doesnt it? For the moment you should know Im having you strung up like this for my own pleasure – just because I love watching people suffer. Go on just a little higher.
Dandilion was wheezing so hard he almost choked.
Enough Rience finally ordered then approached the poet and grabbed him by his shirt ruffles. Listen to me you little cock. Im going to lift the spell so you can talk. But if you try to raise your charming voice any louder than necessary youll be sorry.
He made a gesture with his hand touched the poets cheek with his ring and Dandilion felt sensation return to his jaw tongue and palate.
Now Rience continued quietly I am going to ask you a few questions and you are going to answer them quickly fluently and comprehensively. And if you stammer or hesitate even for a moment if you give me the slightest reason to doubt the truth of your words then… Look down.
Dandilion obeyed. He discovered to his horror that a short rope had been tied to the knots around his ankles with a bucket full of lime attached to the other end.
If I have you pulled any higher Rience smiled cruelly and this bucket lifts with you then you will probably never regain the feeling in your hands. After that I doubt you will be capable of playing anything on a lute. I really doubt it. So I think youll talk to me. Am I right?
Dandilion didnt agree because he couldnt move his head or find his voice out of sheer fright. But Rience did not seem to require confirmation.
It is to be understood he stated that I will know immediately if you are telling the truth if you try to trick me I will realise straight away and I wont be fooled by any poetic ploys or vague erudition. This is a trifle for me – just as paralysing you on the stairs was a trifle. So I advise you to weigh each word with care you piece of scum. So lets get on with it and stop wasting time. As you know Im interested in the heroine of one of your beautiful ballads Queen Calanthe of Cintras granddaughter Princess Cirilla endearingly known as Ciri. According to eye-witnesses this little person died during the siege of the town two years ago. Whereas in your ballad you so vividly and touchingly described her meeting a strange almost legendary individual the… witcher… Geralt or Gerald. Leaving the poetic drivel about destiny and the decrees of fate aside from the rest of the ballad it seems the child survived the Battle of Cintra in one piece. Is that true?
I dont know… moaned Dandilion. By all the gods Im only a poet! Ive heard this and that and the rest…
Well?
The rest I invented. Made it up! I dont know anything! The bard howled on seeing Rience give a sign to the reeking man and feeling the rope tighten. Im not lying!
True. Rience nodded. Youre not lying outright I would have sensed it. But you are beating about the bush. You wouldnt have thought the ballad up just like that not without reason. And you do know the witcher after all. You have often been seen in his company. So talk Dandilion if you treasure your joints. Everything you know.
This Ciri panted the poet was destined for the witcher. Shes a so-called Child Surprise… You must have heard it the storys well known. Her parents swore to hand her over to the witcher—
Her parents are supposed to have handed the child over to that crazed mutant? That murderous mercenary? Youre lying rhymester. Keep such tales for women.
Thats what happened I swear on my mothers soul sobbed Dandilion. I have it from a reliable source… The witcher—
Talk about the girl. For the moment Im not interested in the witcher.
I dont know anything about the girl! I only know that the witcher was going to fetch her from Cintra when the war broke out. I met him at the time. He heard about the massacre about Calanthes death from me… He asked me about the child the queens granddaughter… But I knew everyone in Cintra was killed not a single soul in the last bastion survived—
Go on. Fewer metaphors more hard facts!
When the witcher learned of the massacre and fall of Cintra he forsook his journey. We both escaped north. We parted ways in Hengfors and I havent seen him since… But because he talked on the way a bit about this… Ciri or whatever-her-name-is… and about destiny… Well I made up this ballad. I dont know any more I swear!
Rience scowled at him.
And where is this witcher now? he asked. This hired monster murderer this poetic butcher who likes to discuss destiny?
I told you the last time I saw him—
I know what you said Rience interrupted. I listened carefully to what you said. And now youre going to listen carefully to me. Answer my questions precisely. The question is: if no one has seen Geralt or Gerald the Witcher for over a year where is he hiding? Where does he usually hide?
I dont know where it is the troubadour said quickly. Im not lying. I really dont know—
Too quick Dandilion too quick. Rience smiled ominously. Too eager. You are cunning but not careful enough. You dont know where it is you say. But I warrant you know what it is.
Dandilion clenched his teeth with anger and despair.
Well? Rience made a sign to the reeking man. Where is the witcher hiding? What is the place called?
The poet remained silent. The rope tightened twisting his hands painfully and his feet left the ground. Dandilion let out a howl brief and broken because Riences wizardly ring immediately gagged him.
Higher higher. Rience rested his hands on his hips. You know Dandilion I could use magic to sound out your mind but its exhausting. Besides I like seeing peoples eyes pop out of their sockets from pain. And youre going to tell me anyway.
Dandilion knew he would. The rope secured to his ankles grew taut the bucket of lime scraped along the ground.
Sir said the first ruffian suddenly covering the lantern with his cloak and peering through the gap in the pigsty door someones coming. A lass I think.
You know what to do Rience hissed. Put the lantern out.
The reeking man released the rope and Dandilion tumbled inertly to the ground falling in such a way that he could see the man with the lantern standing at the door and the reeking man a long knife in his hand lying in wait on the other side. Light broke in from the bawdy-house through gaps in the planks and the poet heard the singing and hubbub.
The door to the pigsty creaked open revealing a short figure wrapped in a cloak and wearing a round tightly fitting cap. After a moments hesitation the woman crossed the threshold. The reeking man threw himself at her slashing forcefully with his knife and tumbled to his knees as the knife met with no resistance passing through the figures throat as though through a cloud of smoke. Because the figure really was a cloud of smoke – one which was already starting to disperse. But before it completely vanished another figure burst into the pigsty indistinct dark and nimble as a weasel. Dandilion saw it throw a cloak at the lantern man jump over the reeking one saw something glisten in its hand and heard the reeking man wheeze and choke savagely. The lantern man disentangled himself from the cloak jumped took a swing with his knife. A fiery lightning bolt shot from the dark figure with a hiss slapped over the toughs face and chest with a crack and spread over him like flaming oil. The ruffian screamed piercingly and the grim reek of burning meat filled the pigsty.
Then Rience attacked. The spell he cast illuminated the darkness with a bluish flash in which Dandilion saw a slender woman wearing mans clothes gesticulating strangely with both hands. He only glimpsed her for a second before the blue glow disappeared with a bang and a blinding flash. Rience fell back with a roar of fury and collapsed onto the wooden pigsty walls breaking them with a crash. The woman dressed in mans clothing leapt after him a stiletto flashing in her hand. The pigsty filled with brightness again – this time golden – beaming from a bright oval which suddenly appeared in the air. Dandilion saw Rience spring up from the dusty floor leap into the oval and immediately disappear. The oval dimmed but before it went out entirely the woman ran up to it shouting incomprehensibly stretching out her hand. Something crackled and rustled and the dying oval boiled with roaring flames for a moment. A muffled sound as if coming from a great distance reached Dandilions ears – a sound very much like a scream of pain. The oval went out completely and darkness engulfed the pigsty again. The poet felt the power which gagged him disappear.
Help! he howled. Help!
Stop yelling Dandilion said the woman kneeling next to him and slicing through the knots with Riences stiletto.
Yennefer? Is that you?
Surely youre not going to say you dont remember how I look. And Im sure my voice is not unfamiliar to your musical ear. Can you get up? They didnt break any bones did they?
Dandilion stood with difficulty groaned and stretched his aching shoulders.
Whats with them? He indicated the bodies lying on the ground.
Well check. The enchantress snicked the stiletto shut. One of them should still be alive. Ive a few questions for him.
This one the troubadour stood over the reeking man probably still lives.
I doubt it said Yennefer indifferently. I severed his windpipe and carotid artery. There might still be a little murmur in him but not for long.
Dandilion shuddered.
You slashed his throat?
If out of inborn caution I hadnt sent an illusion in first I would be the one lying there now. Lets look at the other one… Bloody hell. Such a sturdy fellow and he still couldnt take it. Pity pity—
Hes dead too?
He couldnt take the shock. Hmm… I fried him a little too hard… See even his teeth are charred— Whats the matter with you Dandilion? Are you going to be sick?
I am the poet replied indistinctly bending over and leaning his forehead against the pigsty wall.
Thats everything? The enchantress put her tumbler down and reached for the skewer of roast chickens. You havent lied about anything? Havent forgotten anything?
Nothing. Apart from thank you. Thank you Yennefer.
She looked him in the eyes and nodded her head lightly making her glistening black curls writhe and cascade down to her shoulders. She slipped the roast chicken onto a trencher and began dividing it skilfully. She used a knife and fork. Dandilion had only known one person up until then who could eat a chicken with a knife and fork as skilfully. Now he knew how and from whom Geralt had learnt the knack. Well he thought no wonder. After all he did live with her for a year in Vengerberg and before he left her she had instilled a number of strange things into him. He pulled the other chicken from the skewer and without a second thought ripped off a thigh and began eating it pointedly holding it with both hands.
How did you know? he asked. How did you arrive with help on time?
I was beneath Bleobheris during your performance.
I didnt see you.
I didnt want to be seen. Then I followed you into town. I waited here in the tavern – it wasnt fitting after all for me to follow you in to that haven of dubious delight and certain gonorrhoea. But I eventually became impatient and was wandering around the yard when I thought I heard voices coming from the pigsty. I sharpened my hearing and it turned out it wasnt as Id first thought some sodomite but you. Hey innkeeper! More wine if you please!
At your command honoured lady! Quick as a flash!
The same as before please but this time without the water. I can only tolerate water in a bath in wine I find it quite loathsome.
At your service at your service!
Yennefer pushed her plate aside. There was still enough meat on the chicken Dandilion noticed to feed the innkeeper and his family for breakfast. A knife and fork were certainly elegant and refined but they werent very effective.
Thank you he repeated for rescuing me. That cursed Rience wouldnt have spared my life. Hed have squeezed everything from me and then butchered me like a sheep.
Yes I think he would. She poured herself and the bard some wine then raised her tumbler. So lets drink to your rescue and health Dandilion.
And to yours Yennefer he toasted her in return. To health for which – as of today – I shall pray whenever the occasion arises. Im indebted to you beautiful lady and I shall repay the debt in my songs. I shall explode the myth which claims wizards are insensitive to the pain of others that they are rarely eager to help poor unfortunate unfamiliar mortals.
What to do. She smiled half-shutting her beautiful violet eyes. The myth has some justification; it did not spring from nowhere. But youre not a stranger Dandilion. I know you and like you.
Really? The poet smiled too. You have been good at concealing it up until now. Ive even heard the rumour that you cant stand me I quote any more than the plague.
It was the case once. The enchantress suddenly grew serious. Later my opinion changed. Later I was grateful to you.
What for if I may ask?
Never mind she said toying with the empty tumbler. Let us get back to more important questions. Those you were asked in the pigsty while your arms were being twisted out of their sockets. What really happened Dandilion? Have you really not seen Geralt since you fled the banks of the Yaruga? Did you really not know he returned south after the war? That he was seriously wounded – so seriously there were even rumours of his death? Didnt you know anything?
No. I didnt. I stayed in Pont Vanis for a long time in Esterad Thyssens court. And then at Niedamirs in Hengfors—
You didnt know. The enchantress nodded and unfastened her tunic. A black velvet ribbon wound around her neck an obsidian star set with diamonds hanging from it. You didnt know that when his wounds healed Geralt went to Transriver? You cant guess who he was looking for?
That I can. But I dont know if he found her.
You dont know she repeated. You who usually know everything and then sing about everything. Even such intimate matters as someone elses feelings. I listened to your ballads beneath Bleobheris Dandilion. You dedicated a good few verses to me.
Poetry he muttered staring at the chicken has its rights. No one should be offended—
Hair like a ravens wing as a storm in the night… quoted Yennefer with exaggerated emphasis  …and in the violet eyes sleep lightning bolts… Isnt that how it went?
Thats how I remembered you. The poet smiled faintly. May the first who wishes to claim the description is untrue throw the first stone.
Only I dont know the Enchantress pinched her lips together who gave you permission to describe my internal organs. How did it go? Her heart as though a jewel adorned her neck. Hard as if of diamond made and as a diamond so unfeeling sharper than obsidian cutting— Did you make that up yourself? Or perhaps…?
Her lips quivered twisted.
…or perhaps you listened to someones confidences and grievances?
Hmm… Dandilion cleared his throat and veered away from the dangerous subject. Tell me Yennefer when did you last see Geralt?
A long time ago.
After the war?
After the war… Yennefers voice changed a little. No I never saw him after the war. For a long time… I didnt see anybody. Well back to the point Poet. I am a little surprised to discover that you do not know anything you have not heard anything and that in spite of this someone searching for information picked you out to stretch over a beam. Doesnt that worry you?
It does.
Listen to me she said sharply banging her tumbler against the table. Listen carefully. Strike that ballad from your repertoire. Do not sing it again.
Are you talking about—
You know perfectly well what Im talking about. Sing about the war against Nilfgaard. Sing about Geralt and me youll neither harm nor help anyone in the process youll make nothing any better or worse. But do not sing about the Lion Cub of Cintra.
She glanced around to check if any of the few customers at this hour were eavesdropping and waited until the lass clearing up had returned to the kitchen.
And do try to avoid one-to-one meetings with people you dont know she said quietly. People who forget to introduce themselves by conveying greetings from a mutual acquaintance. Understand?
He looked at her surprised. Yennefer smiled.
Greetings from Dijkstra Dandilion.
Now the bard glanced around timidly. His astonishment must have been evident and his expression amusing because the sorceress allowed herself a quite derisive grimace.
While we are on the subject she whispered leaning across the table Dijkstra is asking for a report. Youre on your way back from Verden and hes interested in hearing whats being said at King Ervylls court. He asked me to convey that this time your report should be to the point detailed and under no circumstances in verse. Prose Dandilion. Prose.
The poet swallowed and nodded. He remained silent pondering the question.
But the enchantress anticipated him. Difficult times are approaching she said quietly. Difficult and dangerous. A time of change is coming. It would be a shame to grow old with the uncomfortable conviction that one had done nothing to ensure that these changes are for the better. Dont you agree?
He agreed with a nod and cleared his throat. Yennefer?
Im listening Poet.
Those men in the pigsty… I would like to know who they were what they wanted who sent them. You killed them both but rumour has it that you can draw information even from the dead.
And doesnt rumour also have it that necromancy is forbidden by edict of the Chapter? Let it go Dandilion. Those thugs probably didnt know much anyway. The one who escaped… Hmm… Hes another matter.
Rience. He was a wizard wasnt he?
Yes. But not a very proficient one.
Yet he managed to escape from you. I saw how he did it – he teleported didnt he? Doesnt that prove anything?
Indeed it does. That someone helped him. Rience had neither the time nor the strength to open an oval portal suspended in the air. A portal like that is no joke. Its clear that someone else opened it. Someone far more powerful. Thats why I was afraid to chase him not knowing where I would land. But I sent some pretty hot stuff after him. Hes going to need a lot of spells and some effective burn elixirs and will remain marked for some time.
Maybe you will be interested to hear that he was a Nilfgaardian.
You think so? Yennefer sat up and with a swift movement pulled the stiletto from her pocket and turned it in her palm. A lot of people carry Nilfgaardian knives now. Theyre comfortable and handy – they can even be hidden in a cleavage—
Its not the knife. When he was questioning me he used the term battle for Cintra conquest of the town or something along those lines. Ive never heard anyone describe those events like that. For us it has always been a massacre. The Massacre of Cintra. No one refers to it by any other name.
The magician raised her hand scrutinised her nails. Clever Dandilion. You have a sensitive ear.
Its a professional hazard.
I wonder which profession you have in mind? She smiled coquettishly. But thank you for the information. It was valuable.
Let it be he replied with a smile my contribution to making changes for the better. Tell me Yennefer why is Nilfgaard so interested in Geralt and the girl from Cintra?
Dont stick your nose into that business. She suddenly turned serious. I said you were to forget you ever heard of Calanthes granddaughter.
Indeed you did. But Im not searching for a subject for a ballad.
What the hell are you searching for then? Trouble?
Lets take it he said quietly resting his chin on his clasped hands and looking the enchantress in the eye. Lets take it that Geralt did in fact find and rescue the child. Lets take it that he finally came to believe in the power of destiny and took the child with him. Where to? Rience tried to force it out of me with torture. But you know Yennefer. You know where the witcher is hiding.
I do.
And you know how to get there.
I know that too.
Dont you think he should be warned? Warned that the likes of Rience are looking for him and the little girl? I would go but I honestly dont know where it is… That place whose name I prefer not to say…
Get to the point Dandilion.
If you know where Geralt is you ought to go and warn him. You owe him that Yennefer. There was after all something between you.
Yes she acknowledged coldly. There was something between us. Thats why I know him a bit. He does not like having help imposed on him. And if he was in need of it he would seek it from those he could trust. A year has gone by since those events and I… Ive not had any news from him. And as for our debt I owe him exactly as much as he owes me. No more and no less.
So Ill go then. He raised his head high. Tell me—
I wont she interrupted. Your covers blown Dandilion. They might come after you again; the less you know the better. Vanish from here. Go to Redania to Dijkstra and Philippa Eilhart stick to Vizimirs court. And I warn you once more: forget the Lion Cub of Cintra. Forget about Ciri. Pretend you have never heard the name. Do as I ask. I wouldnt like anything bad to happen to you. I like you too much owe you too much—
Youve said that already. What do you owe me Yennefer?
The sorceress turned her head away did not say anything for a while.
You travelled with him she said finally. Thanks to you he was not alone. You were a friend to him. You were with him.
The bard lowered his eyes.
He didnt get much from it he muttered. He didnt get much from our friendship. He had little but trouble because of me. He constantly had to get me out of some scrape… help me…
She leaned across the table put her hand on his and squeezed it hard without saying anything. Her eyes held regret.
Go to Redania she repeated after a moment. To Tretogor. Stay in Dijkstras and Philippas care. Dont play at being a hero. You have got yourself mixed up in a dangerous affair Dandilion.
Ive noticed. He grimaced and rubbed his aching shoulder. And that is precisely why I believe Geralt should be warned. You are the only one who knows where to look for him. You know the way. I guess you used to be… a guest there…?
Yennefer turned away. Dandilion saw her lips pinch the muscles in her cheek quiver.
Yes in the past she said and there was something elusive and strange in her voice. I used to be a guest there sometimes. But never uninvited.
The wind howled savagely rippling through the grasses growing over the ruins rustling in the hawthorn bushes and tall nettles. Clouds sped across the sphere of the moon momentarily illuminating the great castle drenching the moat and few remaining walls in a pale glow undulating with shadows and revealing mounds of skulls baring their broken teeth and staring into nothingness through the black holes of their eye-sockets. Ciri squealed sharply and hid her face in the witchers cloak.
The mare prodded on by the witchers heels carefully stepped over a pile of bricks and passed through the broken arcade. Her horseshoes ringing against the flagstones awoke weird echoes between the walls muffled by the howling gale. Ciri trembled digging her hands into the horses mane.
Im frightened she whispered.
Theres nothing to be frightened of replied the witcher laying his hand on her shoulder. Its hard to find a safer place in the whole world. This is Kaer Morhen the Witchers Keep. There used to be a beautiful castle here. A long time ago.
She did not reply bowing her head low. The witchers mare called Roach snorted quietly as if she too wanted to reassure the girl.
They immersed themselves in a dark abyss in a long unending black tunnel dotted with columns and arcades. Roach stepped confidently and willingly ignoring the impenetrable darkness and her horseshoes rang brightly against the floor.
In front of them at the end of the tunnel a straight vertical line suddenly flared with a red light. Growing taller and wider it became a door beyond which was a faint glow the flickering brightness of torches stuck in iron mounts on the walls. A black figure stood framed in the door blurred by the brightness.
Who comes? Ciri heard a menacing metallic voice which sounded like a dogs bark. Geralt?
Yes Eskel. Its me.
Come in.
The witcher dismounted took Ciri from the saddle stood her on the ground and pressed a bundle into her little hands which she grabbed tightly only regretting that it was too small for her to hide behind completely.
Wait here with Eskel he said. Ill take Roach to the stables.
Come into the light laddie growled the man called Eskel. Dont lurk in the dark.
Ciri looked up into his face and barely restrained her frightened scream. He wasnt human. Although he stood on two legs although he smelled of sweat and smoke although he wore ordinary human clothes he was not human. No human can have a face like that she thought.
Well what are you waiting for? repeated Eskel.
She didnt move. In the darkness she heard the clatter of Roachs horseshoes grow fainter. Something soft and squeaking ran over her foot. She jumped.
Dont loiter in the dark or the rats will eat your boots.
Still clinging to her bundle Ciri moved briskly towards the light. The rats bolted out from beneath her feet with a squeak. Eskel leaned over took the package from her and pulled back her hood.
A plague on it he muttered. A girl. Thats all we need.
She glanced at him frightened. Eskel was smiling. She saw that he was human after all that he had an entirely human face deformed by a long ugly semi-circular scar running from the corner of his mouth across the length of his cheek up to the ear.
Since youre here welcome to Kaer Morhen he said. What do they call you?
Ciri Geralt replied for her silently emerging from the darkness. Eskel turned around. Suddenly quickly wordlessly the witchers fell into each others arms and wound their shoulders around each other tight and hard. For one brief moment.
Wolf youre alive.
I am.
All right. Eskel took a torch from its bracket. Come on. Im closing the inner gates to stop the heat escaping.
They walked along the corridor. There were rats here too; they flitted under the walls squeaked from the dark abyss from the branching passages and skittered before the swaying circle of light thrown by the torch. Ciri walked quickly trying to keep up with the men.
Whos wintering here Eskel? Apart from Vesemir?
Lambert and Coën.
They descended a steep and slippery flight of stairs. A gleam was visible below them. Ciri heard voices detected the smell of smoke.
The hall was enormous and flooded with light from a huge hearth roaring with flames which were being sucked up into the heart of the chimney. The centre of the hall was taken up by an enormous heavy table. At least ten people could sit around that table. There were three. Three humans. Three witchers Ciri corrected herself. She saw nothing but their silhouettes against the fire in the hearth.
Greetings Wolf. Weve been waiting for you.
Greetings Vesemir. Greetings lads. Its good to be home again.
Who have you brought us?
Geralt was silent for a moment then put his hand on Ciris shoulder and lightly pushed her forward. She walked awkwardly hesitantly huddled up and hunched her head lowered. Im frightened she thought. Im very frightened. When Geralt found me when he took me with him I thought the fear wouldnt come back. I thought it had passed… And now instead of being at home Im in this terrible dark ruined old castle full of rats and dreadful echoes… Im standing in front of a red wall of fire again. I see sinister black figures I see dreadful menacing glistening eyes staring at me—
Who is this child Wolf? Who is this girl?
Shes my… Geralt suddenly stammered. She felt his strong hard hands on her shoulders. And suddenly the fear disappeared vanished without a trace. The roaring red fire gave out warmth. Only warmth. The black silhouettes were the silhouettes of friends. Carers. Their glistening eyes expressed curiosity. Concern. And unease…
Geralts hands clenched over her shoulders.
Shes our destiny.
Verily there is nothing so hide-ous as the monsters so contrary to nature known as witchers for they are the offspring of foul sorcery and devilry. They are rogues without virtue conscience or scruple true diabolic creations fit only for killing. There is no place amidst honest men for such as they.
And Kaer Morhen where these infamous beings nestle where they perform their foul practices must be wiped from the surface of this earth and all trace of it strewn with salt and saltpetre.
Anonymous Monstrum or Description of the Witcher
Intolerance and superstition has always been the domain of the more stupid amongst the common folk and I conjecture will never be uprooted for they are as eternal as stupidity itself. There where mountains tower today one day there will be seas; there where today seas surge will one day be deserts. But stupidity will remain stupidity.
Nicodemus de Boot Meditations on life Happiness and Prosperity
CHAPTER TWO
Triss Merigold blew into her frozen hands wriggled her fingers and murmured a magic formula. Her horse a gelding immediately reacted to the spell snorting and turning its head looking at the enchantress with eyes made watery by the cold and wind.
Youve got two options old thing said Triss pulling on her gloves. Either you get used to magic or I sell you to some peasants to pull a plough.
The gelding pricked up its ears snorted vapour through its nostrils and obediently started down the wooded mountainside. The magician leaned over in the saddle avoiding being lashed by the frosty branches.
The magic worked quickly; she stopped feeling the sting of cold in her elbows and on her neck and the unpleasant sensation of cold which had made her hunch her shoulders and draw her head in disappeared. The spell warming her also muffled the hunger which had been eating at her for several hours. Triss cheered up made herself comfortable in the saddle and with greater attention than before started to take stock of her surroundings.
Ever since she had left the beaten track she had been guided by the greyish-white wall of mountains and their snow-capped summits which glistened gold in those rare moments when the sun pierced the clouds – usually in the morning or just before sunset. Now that she was closer to the mountain chain she had to take greater care. The land around Kaer Morhen was famous for its wildness and inaccessibility and the gap in the granite wall that was a vital landmark was not easy for an inexperienced eye to find. It was enough to turn down one of the numerous gullies and gorges to lose sight of it. And even she who knew the land knew the way and knew where to look for the pass could not allow herself to lose her concentration for an instant.
The forest came to an end. A wide valley opened before the enchantress strewn with boulders which ran across the valley to the sheer mountain-slope on the other side. The Gwenllech the River of White Stones flowed down the heart of the valley foam seething between the boulders and logs washed along by the current. Here in its upper reaches the Gwenllech was no more than a wide but shallow stream. Up here it could be crossed without any difficulty. Lower down in Kaedwen in its middle reaches the river was an insurmountable obstacle rushing and breaking against the beds of its deep chasms.
The gelding driven into the water hastened its step clearly wanting to reach the opposite bank as quickly as possible. Triss held it back lightly – the stream was shallow reaching just above the horses fetlocks but the pebbles covering the bed were slippery and the current was sharp and quick. The water churned and foamed around her mounts legs.
The magician looked up at the sky. The growing cold and increasing wind here in the mountains could herald a blizzard and she did not find the prospect of spending yet another night in a grotto or rocky nook too attractive. She could if she had to continue her journey even through a blizzard; she could locate the path using telepathy she could – using magic – make herself insensitive to the cold. She could if she had to. But she preferred not to have to.
Luckily Kaer Morhen was already close. Triss urged the gelding on to flat scree over an enormous heap of stones washed down by glaciers and streams and rode into a narrow pass between rocky outcrops. The gorge walls rose vertically and seemed to meet high above her only divided by a narrow line of sky. It grew warmer the wind howling above the rocks could no longer reach to lash and sting at her.
The pass broadened leading through a ravine and then into the valley opening onto a huge depression covered by forest which stretched out amidst jagged boulders. The magician ignored the gentle accessible depression rim and rode down towards the forest into the thick backwoods. Dry branches cracked under the geldings hooves. Forced to step over fallen tree trunks the horse snorted danced and stamped. Triss pulled at the reins tugged at her mounts shaggy ear and scolded it harshly with spiteful allusions to its lameness. The steed looking for all the world as though it were ashamed of itself walked with a more even and sprightly gait and picked its way through the thicket.
Before long they emerged onto clearer land riding along the trough of a stream which barely trickled along the ravine bed. The magician looked around carefully finally finding what she was looking for. Over the gully supported horizontally by enormous boulders lay a mighty tree trunk dark bare and turning green with moss. Triss rode closer wanting to make sure this was indeed the Trail and not a tree accidentally felled in a gale. But she spied a narrow indistinct pathway disappearing into the woods. She could not be mistaken – this was definitely the Trail a path encircling the old castle of Kaer Morhen and beset with obstacles where witchers trained to improve their running speeds and controlled breathing. The path was known as the Trail but Triss knew young witchers had given it their own name: The Killer.
She clung to the horses neck and slowly rode under the trunk. At that moment she heard stones grating. And the fast light footsteps of someone running.
She turned in her saddle pulled on the reins and waited for the witcher to run out onto the log.
A witcher did run out onto the log flitted along it like an arrow without slowing down without even using his arms to aid his balance – running nimbly fluently with incredible grace. He flashed by approaching and disappearing amongst the trees without disturbing a single branch. Triss sighed loudly shaking her head in disbelief.
Because the witcher judging by his height and build was only about twelve.
The magician eased the reins nudged the horse with her heels and trotted upstream. She knew the Trail cut across the ravine once more at a spot known as the Gullet. She wanted to catch a glimpse of the little witcher once again – children had not been trained in Kaer Morhen for near to a quarter of a century.
She was not in a great hurry. The narrow Killer path meandered and looped its way through the forest and in order to master it the little witcher would take far longer than she would following the shortcut. However she could not loiter either. Beyond the Gullet the Trail turned into the woods and led straight to the fortress. If she did not catch the boy at the precipice she might not see him at all. She had already visited Kaer Morhen a few times and knew she saw only what the witchers wanted her to see. Triss was not so naïve as to be unaware that they wanted to show her only a tiny fraction of the things to be seen in Kaer Morhen.
After a few minutes riding along the stony trough of the stream she caught sight of the Gullet – a leap over the gully created by two huge mossy rocks overgrown with gnarled stunted trees. She released the reins. The horse snorted and lowered its head towards the water trickling between pebbles.
She did not have to wait long. The witchers silhouette appeared on the rock and the boy jumped not slowing his pace. The magician heard the soft smack of his landing and a moment later a rattle of stones the dull thud of a fall and a quiet cry. Or rather a squeal.
Triss instantly leaped from her saddle threw the fur off her shoulders and dashed across the mountainside pulling herself up using tree branches and roots. Momentum aided her climb until she slipped on the conifer needles and fell to her knees next to a figure huddled on the stones. The youngster on seeing her jumped up like a spring backed away in a flash and nimbly grabbed the sword slung across his back – then tripped and collapsed between the junipers and pines. The magician did not rise from her knees; she stared at the boy and opened her mouth in surprise.
Because it was not a boy.
From beneath an ash-blonde fringe poorly and unevenly cut enormous emerald eyes – the predominant features in a small face with a narrow chin and upturned nose – stared out at her. There was fear in the eyes.
Dont be afraid Triss said tentatively.
The girl opened her eyes even wider. She was hardly out of breath and did not appear to be sweating. It was clear she had already run the Killer more than once.
Nothings happened to you?
The girl did not reply; instead she sprang up hissed with pain shifted her weight to her left leg bent over and rubbed her knee. She was dressed in a sort of leather suit sewn together – or rather stuck together – in a way which would make any tailor who took pride in his craft howl in horror and despair. The only pieces of her equipment which seemed to be relatively new and fitted her were her knee-high boots her belts and her sword. More precisely her little sword.
Dont be afraid repeated Triss still not rising from her knees. I heard your fall and was scared thats why I rushed here—
I slipped murmured the girl.
Have you hurt yourself?
No. You?
The enchantress laughed tried to get up winced and swore at the pain in her ankle. She sat down and carefully straightened her foot swearing once more.
Come here little one help me get up.
Im not little.
If you say so. In that case what are you?
A witcher!
Ha! So come here and help me get up witcher.
The girl did not move from the spot. She shifted her weight from foot to foot and her hands in their fingerless woollen gloves toyed with her sword belt as she glanced suspiciously at Triss.
Have no fear said the enchantress with a smile. Im not a bandit or outsider. Im called Triss Merigold and Im going to Kaer Morhen. The witchers know me. Dont gape at me. I respect your suspicion but be reasonable. Would I have got this far if I hadnt known the way? Have you ever met a human on the Trail?
The girl overcame her hesitation approached and stretched out her hand. Triss stood with only a little assistance. Because she was not concerned with having help. She wanted a closer look at the girl. And to touch her.
The green eyes of the little witcher-girl betrayed no signs of mutation and the touch of her little hand did not produce the slight pleasant tingling sensation so characteristic of witchers. Although she ran the Killer path with a sword slung across her back the ashen-haired girl had not been subjected to the Trial of Grasses or to Changes. Of that Triss was certain.
Show me your knee little one.
Im not little.
Sorry. But surely you have a name?
I do. Im… Ciri.
Its a pleasure. A bit closer if you please Ciri.
Its nothing.
I want to see what nothing looks like. Ah thats what I thought. Nothing looks remarkably like torn trousers and skin grazed down to raw flesh. Stand still and dont be scared.
Im not scared… Awww!
The magician laughed and rubbed her palm itching from casting the spell against her hip. The girl bent over and gazed at her knee.
Oooh she said. It doesnt hurt any more! And theres no hole… Was that magic?
Youve guessed it.
Are you a witch?
Guessed again. Although I prefer to be called an enchantress. To avoid getting it wrong you can call me by my name Triss. Just Triss. Come on Ciri. My horse is waiting at the bottom. Well go to Kaer Morhen together.
I ought to run. Ciri shook her head. Its not good to stop running because you get milk in your muscles. Geralt says—
Geralt is at the keep?
Ciri frowned pinched her lips together and shot a glance at the enchantress from beneath her ashen fringe. Triss chuckled again.
All right she said. I wont ask. A secrets a secret and youre right not to disclose it to someone you hardly know. Come on. When we get there well see whos at the castle and who isnt. And dont worry about your muscles – I know what to do about lactic acid. Ah heres my mount. Ill help you…
She stretched out her hand but Ciri didnt need any help. She jumped agilely into the saddle lightly almost without taking off. The gelding started surprised and stamped but the girl quickly took up the reins and reassured it.
You know how to handle a horse I see.
I can handle anything.
Move up towards the pommel. Triss slipped her foot into the stirrup and caught hold of the mane. Make a bit of room for me. And dont poke my eye out with that sword.
The gelding spurred on by her heels moved off along the stream bed at a walking pace. They rode across another gully and climbed the rounded mountainside. From there they could see the ruins of Kaer Morhen huddled against the stone precipices – the partially demolished trapezium of the defensive wall the remains of the barbican and gate the thick blunt column of the donjon.
The gelding snorted and jerked its head crossing what remained of the bridge over the moat. Triss tugged at the reins. The decaying skulls and skeletons strewn across the river bed made no impression on her. She had seen them before.
I dont like this the girl suddenly remarked. Its not as it should be. The dead should to be buried in the ground. Under a barrow. Shouldnt they?
They should the magician agreed calmly. I think so too. But the witchers treat this graveyard as a… reminder.
Reminder of what?
Kaer Morhen Triss said as she guided the horse towards the shattered arcades was assaulted. There was a bloody battle here in which almost all the witchers died. Only those who werent in the keep at the time survived.
Who attacked them? And why?
I dont know she lied. It was a terribly long time ago Ciri. Ask the witchers about it.
I have grunted the girl. But they didnt want to tell me.
I can understand that thought the magician. A child trained to be a witcher a girl at that who has not undergone the mutations should not be told such things. A child like that should not hear about the massacre. A child like that should not be terrified by the prospect that they too may one day hear words describing it like those which were screamed by the fanatics who marched on Kaer Morhen long ago. Mutant. Monster. Freak. Damned by the gods a creature contrary to nature. No I do not blame the witchers for not telling you about it little Ciri. And I shant tell you either. I have even more reason to be silent. Because I am a wizard and without the aid of wizards those fanatics would never have conquered the castle. And that hide-ous lampoon that widely distributed Monstrum which stirred the fanatics up and drove them to such wickedness was also apparently some wizards anonymous work. But I little Ciri do not recognise collective responsibility I do not feel the need to expiate the events which took place half a century before my birth. And the skeletons which are meant to serve as an eternal reminder will ultimately rot away completely disintegrate into dust and be forgotten will disappear with the wind which constantly whips the mountainside…
They dont want to lie like that said Ciri suddenly. They dont want to be a symbol a bad conscience or a warning. But neither do they want their dust to be swept away by the wind.
Triss raised her head hearing a change in the girls voice. Immediately she sensed a magical aura a pulsating and a rush of blood in her temples. She grew tense but did not utter a word afraid of breaking into or disrupting what was happening.
An ordinary barrow. Ciris voice was becoming more and more unnatural metallic cold and menacing. A mound of earth which will be overgrown with nettles. Death has cold blue eyes and the height of the obelisk does not matter nor does the writing engraved on it matter. Who can know that better than you Triss Merigold the Fourteenth One of the Hill?
The enchantress froze. She saw the girls hands clench the horses mane.
You died on the Hill Triss Merigold. The strange evil voice spoke again. Why have you come here? Go back go back at once and take this child the Child of Elder Blood with you. Return her to those to whom she belongs. Do this Fourteenth One. Because if you do not you will die once more. The day will come when the Hill will claim you. The mass grave and the obelisk on which your name is engraved will claim you.
The gelding neighed loudly tossing its head. Ciri jerked suddenly shuddered.
What happened? asked Triss trying to control her voice.
Ciri coughed passed both hands through her hair and rubbed her face.
Nn… nothing… she muttered hesitantly. Im tired thats why… Thats why I fell asleep. I ought to run…
The magical aura disappeared. Triss experienced a sudden cold wave sweeping through her entire body. She tried to convince herself it was the effect of the defensive spell dying away but she knew that wasnt true. She glanced up at the stone blocks of the castle the black empty eye-sockets of its ruined loop-holes gaping at her. A shudder ran through her.
The horses shoes rang against the slabs in the courtyard. The magician quickly leaped from the saddle and held out her hand to Ciri. Taking advantage of the touch of their hands she carefully emitted a magical impulse. And was astounded. Because she didnt feel anything. No reaction no reply. And no resistance. In the girl who had just a moment ago manifested an exceptionally strong aura there was not a trace of magic. She was now an ordinary badly dressed child whose hair had been incompetently cut.
But a moment ago this child had been no ordinary child.
Triss did not have time to ponder the strange event. The grate of an iron-clad door reached her coming from the dark void of the corridor which gaped behind the battered portal. She slipped the fur cape from her shoulders removed her fox-fur hat and with a swift movement of the head tousled her hair – long full locks the colour of fresh chestnuts with a sheen of gold her pride and identifying characteristic.
Ciri sighed with admiration. Triss smiled pleased by the effect shed had. Beautiful long loose hair was a rarity an indication of a womans position her status the sign of a free woman a woman who belonged to herself. The sign of an unusual woman – because normal maidens wore their hair in plaits normal married women hid theirs beneath a caul or a coif. Women of high birth including queens curled their hair and styled it. Warriors cut it short. Only druids and magicians – and whores – wore their hair naturally so as to emphasise their independence and freedom.
The witchers appeared unexpectedly and silently as usual and also as usual from nowhere. They stood before her tall slim their arms crossed the weight of their bodies on their left legs – a position from which she knew they could attack in a split second. Ciri stood next to them in an identical position. In her ludicrous clothes she looked very funny.
Welcome to Kaer Morhern Triss.
Greetings Geralt.
He had changed. He gave the impression of having aged. Triss knew that biologically this was impossible – witchers aged certainly but too slowly for an ordinary mortal or a magician as young as her to notice the changes. But one glance was enough for her to realise that although mutation could hold back the physical process of ageing it did not alter the mental. Geralts face slashed by wrinkles was the best evidence of this. With a sense of deep sorrow Triss tore her gaze away from the white-haired witchers eyes. Eyes which had evidently seen too much. Whats more she saw nothing of what she had expected in those eyes.
Welcome he repeated. We are glad youve come.
Eskel stood next to Geralt resembling the Wolf like a brother apart from the colour of his hair and the long scar which disfigured his cheek. And the youngest of the Kaer Morhen witchers Lambert was there with his usual ugly mocking expression. Vesemir was not there.
Welcome and come in said Eskel. It is as cold and blustery as if someone has hung themselves. Ciri where are you off to? The invitation does not apply to you. The sun is still high even if it is obscured. You can still train.
Hey. The Enchantress tossed her hair. Politeness comes cheap in Witchers Keep now I see. Ciri was the first to greet me and brought me to the castle. She ought to keep me company—
She is undergoing training here Merigold. Lambert grimaced in a parody of a smile. He always called her that: Merigold without giving her a title or a name. Triss hated it. She is a student not a major domo. Welcoming guests even such pleasant ones as yourself is not one of her duties. Were off Ciri.
Triss gave a little shrug pretending not to see Geralt and Eskels embarrassed expressions. She did not say anything not wanting to embarrass them further. And above all she did not want them to see how very intrigued and fascinated she was by the girl.
Ill take your horse offered Geralt reaching for the reins. Triss surreptitiously shifted her hand and their palms joined. So did their eyes.
Ill come with you she said naturally. There are a few little things in the saddle-bags which Ill need.
You gave me a very disagreeable experience not so long ago he muttered as soon as they had entered the stable. I studied your impressive tombstone with my own eyes. The obelisk in memory of your heroic death at the battle of Sodden. The news that it was a mistake only reached me recently. I cant understand how anyone could mistake anyone else for you Triss.
Its a long story she answered. Ill tell you some time. And please forgive me for the disagreeable moment.
Theres nothing to forgive. Ive not had many reasons to be happy of late and the feelings I experienced on hearing that you lived cannot compare to any other. Except perhaps what I feel now when I look at you.
Triss felt something explode inside her. Her fear of meeting the white-haired witcher which had accompanied her throughout her journey had struggled within her with her hope of having such a meeting. Followed by the sight of that tired jaded face those sick eyes which saw everything cold and calculating which were unnaturally calm but yet so infused with emotion…
She threw her arms around his neck instantly without thinking. She caught hold of his hand abruptly placed it on the nape of her neck under her hair. A tingling ran down her back penetrated her with such rapture she almost cried out. In order to muffle and restrain the cry her lips found his lips and stuck to them. She trembled pressing hard against him her excitement building and increasing forgetting herself more and more.
Geralt did not forget himself.
Triss… Please.
Oh Geralt… So much…
Triss. He moved her away delicately. Were not alone… Theyre coming.
She glanced at the entrance and saw the shadows of the approaching witchers only after some time heard their steps even later. Oh well her hearing which she considered very sensitive could not compete with that of a witcher.
Triss my child!
Vesemir!
Vesemir was really very old. Who knows he could be even older than Kaer Morhen. But he walked towards her with a brisk energetic and sprightly step; his grip was vigorous and his hands strong.
I am happy to see you again Grandfather.
Give me a kiss. No not on the hand little sorceress. You can kiss my hand when Im resting on my bier. Which will no doubt be soon. Oh Triss it is a good thing you have come… Who can cure me if not you?
Cure you? Of what? Of behaving like a child surely! Take your hand from my backside old man or Ill set fire to that grey beard of yours!
Forgive me. I keep forgetting you are grown up and I can no longer put you on my knee and pat you. As to my health… Oh Triss old age is no joke. My bones ache so I want to howl. Will you help an old man child?
I will. The enchantress freed herself from his bearlike embrace and cast her eye over the witcher accompanying Vesemir. He was young apparently the same age as Lambert and wore a short black beard which did not hide the severe disfigurement left behind by smallpox. This was unusual; witchers were generally highly immune to infectious diseases.
Triss Merigold Coën. Geralt introduced them to each other. This is Coëns first winter with us. He comes from the north from Poviss.
The young witcher bowed. He had unusually pale yellow-green irises and the whites of his eyes riddled with red threads indicated difficult and troublesome processes during his mutation.
Let us go child uttered Vesemir taking her by the arm. A stable is no place to welcome a guest but I couldnt wait to see you.
In the courtyard in a recess in the wall sheltered from the wind Ciri was training under Lamberts instructions. Deftly balancing on a beam hanging on chains she was attacking – with her sword – a leather sack bound with straps to make it resemble a human torso. Triss stopped to watch.
Wrong! yelled Lambert. Youre getting too close! Dont hack blindly at it! I told you the very tip of the sword at the carotid artery! Where does a humanoid have its carotid artery? On top of its head? Whats happening? Concentrate Princess!
Ha thought Triss. So it is truth not a legend. She is the one. I guessed correctly.
She decided to attack without delay not allowing the witchers to try any ruses.
The famous Child Surprise? she said indicating Ciri. I see you have applied yourselves to fulfilling the demands of fate and destiny? But it seems you have muddled the stories boys. In the fairy-tales I was told shepherdesses and orphans become princesses. But here I see a princess is becoming a witcher. Does that not appear somewhat daring to you?
Vesemir glanced at Geralt. The white-haired witcher remained silent his face perfectly still; he did not react with even the slightest quiver of his eyelids to Vesemirs unspoken request for support.
Its not what you think. The old man cleared his throat. Geralt brought her here last autumn. She has no one apart from— Triss how can one not believe in destiny when—
What has destiny to do with waving a sword around?
We are teaching her to fence Geralt said quietly turning towards her and looking her straight in the eyes. What else are we to teach her? We know nothing else. Destiny or no Kaer Morhen is now her home. At least for a while. Training and swordsmanship amuse her keep her healthy and fit. They allow her to forget the tragedy she has lived through. This is her home now Triss. She has no other.
Masses of Cintrians the enchantress said holding his gaze fled to Verden after the defeat to Brugge Temeria and the Islands of Skellige. Amongst them are magnates barons knights. Friends relations… as well as this girls subjects.
Friends and relations did not look for her after the war. They did not find her.
Because she was not destined for them? She smiled at him not very sincerely but very prettily. As prettily as she could. She did not want him to use that tone of voice.
The witcher shrugged. Triss knowing him a little immediately changed tactics and gave up the argument.
She looked at Ciri again. The girl agilely stepping along the balance beam executed a half-turn cut lightly and immediately leaped away. The dummy struck swayed on its rope.
Well at last! shouted Lambert. Youve finally got it! Go back and do it again. I want to make sure it wasnt a fluke!
The sword Triss turned to the witchers looks sharp. The beam looks slippery and unstable. And Lambert looks like an idiot demoralising the girl with all his shouting. Arent you afraid of an unfortunate accident? Or maybe youre relying on destiny to protect the child against it?
Ciri practised for nearly six months without a sword said Coën. She knows how to move. And we are keeping an eye on her because—
Because this is her home finished Geralt quietly but firmly. Very firmly. Using a tone which put an end to the discussion.
Exactly. It is. Vesemir took a deep breath. Triss you must be tired. And hungry?
I cannot deny it she sighed giving up on trying to catch Geralts eye. To be honest Im on my last legs. I spent last night on the Trail in a shepherds hut which was practically falling apart buried in straw and sawdust. I used spells to insulate the shack; if it werent for that I would probably be dead. I long for clean linen.
You will have supper with us now. And then you will sleep as long as you wish and rest. We have prepared the best room for you the one in the tower. And we have put the best bed we could find in Kaer Morhen there.
Thank you. Triss smiled faintly. In the tower she thought. All right Vesemir. Let it be the tower for today if appearances matter so much to you. I can sleep in the tower in the best of all the beds in Kaer Morhen. Although I would prefer to sleep with Geralt in the worst.
Lets go Triss.
Lets go.
The wind hammered against the shutters and ruffled the remains of the moth-eaten tapestries which had been used to insulate the window. Triss lay in perfect darkness in the best bed in the whole of Kaer Morhen. She couldnt sleep – and not because the best bed in Kaer Morhen was a dilapidated antique. Triss was thinking hard. And all the thoughts chasing sleep away revolved around one fundamental question.
What had she been summoned to the fortress for? Who had summoned her? Why? For what purpose?
Vesemirs illness was just a pretext. Vesemir was a witcher. The fact that he was also an old man did not change the fact that many a youngster could envy him his health. If the old man had been stung by a manticore or bitten by a werewolf Triss would have accepted that she had been summoned to aid him. But aching bones was a joke. For an ache in his bones not a very original complaint within the horrendously cold walls of Kaer Morhen Vesemir could have treated with a witchers elixir or – an even simpler solution – with strong rye vodka applied internally and externally in equal proportions. He didnt need a magician with her spells philtres and amulets.
So who had summoned her? Geralt?
Triss thrashed about in the bedclothes feeling a wave of heat come over her. And a wave of arousal made all the stronger by anger. She swore quietly kicked her quilt away and rolled on to her side. The ancient bedstead squeaked and creaked. Ive no control over myself she thought. Im behaving like a stupid adolescent. Or even worse – like an old maid deprived of affection. I cant even think logically.
She swore again.
Of course it wasnt Geralt. Dont get excited little one. Dont get excited just think of his expression in the stable. Youve seen expressions like that before. Youve seen them so dont kid yourself. The foolish contrite embarrassed expressions of men who want to forget who regret who dont want to remember what happened dont want to go back to what has been. By all the gods little one dont fool yourself its different this time. Its never different. And you know it. Because after all youve had a fair amount of experience.
As far as her erotic life was concerned Triss Merigold had the right to consider herself a typical enchantress. It had began with the sour taste of forbidden fruit made all the more exciting by the strict rules of the academy and the prohibitions of the mistress under whom she practised. Then came her independence freedom and a crazy promiscuity which ended as it usually does in bitterness disillusionment and resignation. Then followed a long period of loneliness and the discovery that if she wanted to release her tension and stress then someone who wanted to consider himself her lord and master – as soon as he had turned on his back and wiped the sweat from his brow – was entirely superfluous. There were far less troublesome ways of calming her nerves – ones with the additional advantages of not staining her towels with blood not passing wind under the quilt and not demanding breakfast. That was followed by a short-lived and entertaining fascination with the same sex which ended in the conclusion that soiling towels passing wind and greediness were by no means exclusively male attributes. Finally like all but a few magicians Triss moved to affairs with other wizards which proved sporadic and frustrating in their cold technical and almost ritual course.
Then Geralt of Rivia appeared. A witcher leading a stormy life and tied to her good friend Yennefer in a strange turbulent and almost violent relationship.
Triss had watched them both and was jealous even though it seemed there was little to be jealous of. Their relationship quite obviously made them both unhappy had led straight to destruction pain and yet against all logic… it had lasted. Triss couldnt understand it. And it had fascinated her. It had fascinated her to such an extent that…
…she had seduced the witcher – with the help of a little magic. She had hit on a propitious moment a moment when he and Yennefer had scratched at each others eyes yet again and had abruptly parted. Geralt had needed warmth and had wanted to forget.
No Triss had not desired to take him away from Yennefer. As a matter of fact her friend was more important to her than he was. But her brief relationship with the witcher had not disappointed. She had found what she was looking for – emotions in the form of guilt anxiety and pain. His pain. She had experienced his emotions it had excited her and when they parted she had been unable to forget it. And she had only recently understood what pain is. The moment when she had overwhelmingly wanted to be with him again. For a short while – just for a moment – to be with him.
And now she was so close…
Triss clenched her fist and punched the pillow. No she thought no. Dont be silly. Dont think about it. Think about…
About Ciri. Is she…
Yes. She was the real reason behind her visit to Kaer Morhen. The ash-blonde girl who here in Kaer Morhen they want to turn into a witcher. A real witcher. A mutant. A killing machine like themselves.
Its clear she suddenly thought feeling a passionate arousal of an entirely different nature. Its obvious. They want to mutate the child subject her to the Trial of Grasses and Changes but they dont know how to do it. Vesemir was the only witcher left from the previous generation and he was only a fencing instructor. The Laboratorium hidden in the vaults of Kaer Morhen with its dusty demi-johns of elixirs the alembics ovens and retorts… None of the witchers knew how to use them. The mutagenic elixirs had been concocted by some renegade wizard in the distant past and then perfected over the years by the wizards successors who had over the years magically controlled the process of Changes to which children were subjected. And at a vital moment the chain had snapped. There was no more magical knowledge or power. The witchers had the herbs and Grasses they had the Laboratorium. They knew the recipe. But they had no wizard.
Who knows she thought perhaps they have tried?Have they given children concoctions prepared without the use of magic?
She shuddered at the thought of what might have happened to those children.
And now they want to mutate the girl but cant. And that might mean… They may ask me to help. And then Ill see something no living wizard has seen Ill learn something no living wizard has learned. Their famous Grasses and herbs the secret virus cultures the renowned mysterious recipes…
And I will be the one to give the child a number of elixirs who will watch the Changes of mutation who will watch with my own eyes…
Watch the ashen-haired child die.
Oh no. Triss shuddered again. Never. Not at such a price.
Besides she thought Ive probably got excited too soon again. Thats probably not what this is about. We talked over supper gossiped about this and that. I tried to guide the conversation to the Child Surprise several times to no avail. They changed the subject at once.
She had watched them. Vesemir had been tense and troubled; Geralt uneasy Lambert and Eskel falsely merry and talkative Coën so natural as to be unnatural. The only one who had been sincere and open was Ciri rosy-cheeked from the cold dishevelled happy and devilishly voracious. They had eaten beer potage thick with croutons and cheese and Ciri had been surprised they had not served mushrooms as well. They had drunk cider but the girl had been given water and was clearly both astonished and revolted by it. Wheres the salad? she had yelled and Lambert had rebuked her sharply and ordered her to take her elbows off the table.
Mushrooms and salad. In December?
Of course thought Triss. Theyre feeding her those legendary cave saprophytes – a mountain plant unknown to science – giving her the famous infusions of their mysterious herbs to drink. The girl is developing quickly is acquiring a witchers infernal fitness. Naturally without the mutation without the risk without the hormonal upheaval. But the magician must not know this. It is to be kept a secret from the magician. They arent going to tell me anything; they arent going to show me anything.
I saw how that girl ran. I saw how she danced on the beam with her sword agile and swift full of a dancers near-feline grace moving like an acrobat. I must she thought I absolutely must see her body see how shes developing under the influence of whatever it is theyre feeding her. And what if I managed to steal samples of these mushrooms and salads and take them away? Well well…
And trust? I dont give a fig for your trust witchers. Theres cancer out there in the world smallpox tetanus and leukaemia there are allergies theres cot death. And youre keeping your mushrooms which could perhaps be distilled and turned into life-saving medicines hidden away from the world. Youre keeping them a secret even from me and others to whom you declare your friendship respect and trust. Even Im forbidden to see not just the Laboratorium but even the bloody mushrooms!
So why did you bring me here? Me a magician?
Magic!
Triss giggled. Ha she thought witchers Ive got you! Ciri scared you just as she did me. She withdrew into a daydream started to prophesy gave out an aura which after all you can sense almost as well as I can. She automatically reached for something psychokinetically or bent a pewter spoon with her will as she stared at it during lunch. She answered questions you only thought and maybe even some which you were afraid to ask yourselves. And you felt fear. You realised that your Surprise is more surprising than you had imagined.
You realised that you have the Source in Kaer Morhen.
And that you cant manage without a magician.
And you dont have a single friendly magician not a single one you could trust. Apart from me and…
And Yennefer.
The wind howled banged the shutter and swelled the tapestry. Triss rolled on to her back and lost in thought started to bite her thumb nail.
Geralt had not invited Yennefer. He had invited her. Does that mean…?
Who knows. Maybe. But if its as I think then why…?
Why…?
Why hasnt he come to me? she shouted quietly into the darkness angry and aroused.
She was answered by the wind howling amidst the ruins.
The morning was sunny but devilishly cold. Triss woke chilled through and through without having had enough sleep but finally assured and decided.
She was the last to go down to the hall. She accepted the tribute of gazes which rewarded her efforts – she had changed her travel clothes for an attractive but simple dress and had skilfully applied magical scents and nonmagical but incredibly expensive cosmetics. She ate her porridge chatting with the witchers about unimportant and trivial matters.
Water again? muttered Ciri suddenly peering into her tumbler. My teeth go numb when I drink water! I want some juice! That blue one!
Dont slouch said Lambert stealing a glance at Triss from the corner of his eye. And dont wipe your mouth with your sleeve! Finish your food; its time for training. The days are getting shorter.
Geralt. Triss finished her porridge. Ciri fell on the Trail yesterday. Nothing serious but it was because of that jesters outfit she wears. It all fits so badly and it hinders her movements.
Vesemir cleared his throat and turned his eyes away. Aha thought the enchantress so its your work master of the sword. Predictable enough Ciris short tunic does look as if it has been cut out with a knife and sewn together with an arrow-head.
The days are indeed getting shorter she continued not waiting for a comment. But were going to make today shorter still. Ciri have you finished? Come with me if you please. We shall make some vital adjustments to your uniform.
Shes been running around in this for a year Merigold said Lambert angrily. And everything was fine until…
…until a woman arrived who cant bear to look at clothes in poor taste which dont fit? Youre right Lambert. But a woman has arrived and the old orders collapsed; a time of great change has arrived. Come on Ciri.
The girl hesitated looked at Geralt. Geralt nodded his agreement and smiled. Pleasantly. Just as he had smiled in the past when when…
Triss turned her eyes away. His smile was not for her.
Ciris little room was a faithful replica of the witchers quarters. It was like theirs devoid of almost all fittings and furniture. There was practically nothing there beside a few planks nailed together to form a bed a stool and a trunk. Witchers decorated the walls and doors of their quarters with the skins of animals they killed when hunting – stags lynx wolves and even wolverines. On the door of Ciris little room however hung the skin of an enormous rat with a hide-ous scaly tail. Triss fought back her desire to tear the stinking abomination down and throw it out of the window.
The girl standing by the bed stared at her expectantly.
Well try said the enchantress to make this… sheath fit a little better. Ive always had a knack for cutting and sewing so I ought to be able to manage this goatskin too. And you little witcher-girl have you ever had a needle in your hand? Have you been taught anything other than making holes with a sword in sacks of straw?
When I was in Transriver in Kagen I had to spin muttered Ciri unwillingly. They didnt give me any sewing because I only spoilt the linen and wasted thread; they had to undo everything. The spinning was terribly boring – yuk!
True giggled Triss. Its hard to find anything more boring. I hated spinning too.
And did you have to? I did because… But youre a wi— magician. You can conjure anything up! That amazing dress… did you conjure it up?
No. Triss smiled. Nor did I sew it myself. Im not that talented.
And my clothes how are you going to make them? Conjure them up?
Theres no need. A magic needle is enough one which we shall charm into working more vigorously. And if theres a need…
Triss slowly ran her hand across the torn hole in the sleeve of Ciris jacket murmuring a spell while stimulating an amulet to work. Not a trace remained of the hole. Ciri squealed with joy.
Thats magic! Im going to have a magical jacket! Wow!
Only until I make you an ordinary – but good – one. Right now take all that off young lady and change into something else. These arent your only clothes surely?
Ciri shook her head lifted the lid of the trunk and showed her a faded loose dress a dark grey tunic a linen shirt and a woollen blouse resembling a penitents sack.
This is mine she said. This is what I came in. But I dont wear it now. Its womans stuff.
I understand. Triss grimaced mockingly. Womans or not for the time being youll have to change into it. Well get on with it get undressed. Let me help you… Damn it! Whats this? Ciri?
The girls shoulders were covered in massive bruises suffused with blood. Most of them had already turned yellow; some were fresh.
What the hell is this? the magician repeated angrily. Who beat you like this?
This? Ciri looked at her shoulders as if surprised by the number of bruises. Oh this… That was the windmill. I was too slow.
What windmill? Bloody hell!
The windmill repeated Ciri raising her huge eyes to look up at the magician. Its a sort of… Well… Im using it to learn to dodge while attacking. Its got these paws made of sticks and it turns and waves the paws. You have to jump very quickly and dodge. You have to learn a lefrex. If you havent got the lefrex the windmill wallops you with a stick. At the beginning the windmill gave me a really terribly horrible thrashing. But now—
Take the leggings and shirt off. Oh sweet gods! Dear girl! Can you really walk? Run?
Both hips and her left thigh were black and blue with haematomas and swellings. Ciri shuddered and hissed pulling away from the magicians hand. Triss swore viciously in Dwarvish using inexpressibly foul language.
Was that the windmill too? she asked trying to remain calm.
This? No. This this was the windmill. Ciri pointed indifferently to an impressive bruise below her left knee covering her shin. And these other ones… They were the pendulum. I practise my fencing steps on the pendulum. Geralt says Im already good at the pendulum. He says Ive got… Flair. Ive got flair.
And if you run out of flair – Triss ground her teeth together – I take it the pendulum thumps you?
But of course the girl confirmed looking at her clearly surprised at this lack of knowledge. It thumps you and how.
And here? On your side? What was that? A smiths hammer?
Ciri hissed with pain and blushed.
I fell off the comb…
…and the comb thumped you finished Triss controlling herself with increasing difficulty. Ciri snorted.
How can a comb thump you when its buried in the ground? It cant! I just fell. I was practising a jumping pirouette and it didnt work. Thats where the bruise came from. Because I hit a post.
And you lay there for two days? In pain? Finding it hard to breathe?
Not at all. Coën rubbed it and put me straight back on the comb. You have to you know? Otherwise you catch fear.
What?
You catch fear Ciri repeated proudly brushing her ashen fringe from her forehead. Didnt you know? Even when something bad happens to you you have to go straight back to that piece of equipment or you get frightened. And if youre frightened youll be hopeless at the exercise. You mustnt give up. Geralt said so.
I have to remember that maxim the enchantress murmured through her teeth. And that it came from Geralt. Not a bad prescription for life although Im not sure it applies in every situation. But it is easy to put into practise at someone elses expense. So you mustnt give up? Even though you are being thumped and beaten in a thousand ways youre to get up and carry on practising?
Of course. A witchers not afraid of anything.
Is that so? And you Ciri? You arent afraid of anything? Answer truthfully.
The girl turned away and bit her lip.
You wont tell anybody?
I wont.
Im frightened of two pendulums. Two at the same time. And the windmill but only when its set to go fast. And theres also a long balance I still have to go on that… with a safety de— A safety device. Lambert says Im a sissy and a wimp but thats not true. Geralt told me my weight is distributed a little differently because Im a girl. Ive simply got to practise more unless… I wanted to ask you something. May I?
You may.
If you know magic and spells… If you can cast them… Can you turn me into a boy?
No Triss replied in an icy tone. I cant.
Hmm… The little witcher-girl was clearly troubled. But could you at least…
At least what?
Could you do something so I dont have to… Ciri blushed. Ill whisper it in your ear.
Go on. Triss leaned over. Im listening.
Ciri growing even redder brought her head closer to the enchantresss chestnut hair.
Triss sat up abruptly her eyes flaming.
Today? Now?
Mhm.
Hell and bloody damnation! the enchantress yelled and kicked the stool so hard that it hit the door and brought down the rat skin. Pox plague shit and leprosy! Im going to kill those cursed idiots!
Calm down Merigold said Lambert. Its unhealthy to get so worked up especially with no reason.
Dont preach at me! And stop calling me Merigold! But best of all stop talking altogether. Im not speaking to you. Vesemir Geralt have any of you seen how terribly battered this child is? She hasnt got a single healthy spot on her body!
Dear child said Vesemir gravely dont let yourself get carried away by your emotions. You were brought up differently youve seen children being brought up in another way. Ciri comes from the south where girls and boys are brought up in the same way like the elves. She was put on a pony when she was five and when she was eight she was already riding out hunting. She was taught to use a bow javelin and sword. A bruise is nothing new to Ciri—
Dont give me that nonsense Triss flared. Dont pretend youre stupid. This is not some pony or horse or sleigh ride. This is Kaer Morhen! On these windmills and pendulums of yours on this Killer path of yours dozens of boys have broken their bones and twisted their necks boys who were hard seasoned vagabonds like you found on roads and pulled out of gutters. Sinewy scamps and good-for-nothings pretty experienced despite their short lives. What chance has Ciri got? Even though shes been brought up in the south with elven methods even growing up under the hand of a battle-axe like Lioness Calanthe that little one was and still is a princess. Delicate skin slight build light bones… Shes a girl! What do you want to turn her into? A witcher?
That girl said Geralt quietly and calmly that petite delicate princess lived through the Massacre of Cintra. Left entirely to her own devices she stole past Nilfgaards cohorts. She successfully fled the marauders who prowled the villages plundering and murdering anything that still lived. She survived on her own for two weeks in the forests of Transriver entirely alone. She spent a month roaming with a pack of fugitives slogging as hard as all the others and starving like all the others. For almost half a year having been taken in by a peasant family she worked on the land and with the livestock. Believe me Triss life has tried seasoned and hardened her no less than good-for-nothings like us who were brought to Kaer Morhen from the highways. Ciri is no weaker than unwanted bastards like us who were left with witchers in taverns like kittens in a wicker basket. And her gender? What difference does that make?
You still ask? You still dare ask that? yelled the magician. What difference does it make? Only that the girl not being like you has her days! And bears them exceptionally badly! And you want her to tear her lungs out on the Killer and some bloody windmills!
Despite her outrage Triss felt an exquisite satisfaction at the sight of the sheepish expressions of the young witchers and Vesemirs jaw suddenly dropping open.
You didnt even know. She nodded in what was now a calm concerned and gentle reproach. Youre pathetic guardians. Shes ashamed to tell you because she was taught not to mention such complaints to men. And shes ashamed of the weakness the pain and the fact that she is less fit. Has any one of you thought about that? Taken any interest in it? Or tried to guess what might be the matter with her? Maybe her very first bleed happened here in Kaer Morhen? And she cried to herself at night unable to find any sympathy consolation or even understanding from anyone? Has any one of you given it any thought whatsoever?
Stop it Triss moaned Geralt quietly. Thats enough. Youve achieved what you wanted. And maybe even more.
The devil take it cursed Coën. Weve turned out to be right idiots theres no two ways about it eh Vesemir and you—
Silence growled the old witcher. Not a word.
It was Eskels behaviour which was most unlikely; he got up approached the enchantress bent down low took her hand and kissed it respectfully. She swiftly withdrew her hand. Not so as to demonstrate her anger and annoyance but to break the pleasant piercing vibration triggered by the witchers touch. Eskel emanated powerfully. More powerfully than Geralt.
Triss he said rubbing the hide-ous scar on his cheek with embarrassment help us. We ask you. Help us Triss.
The enchantress looked him in the eye and pursed her lips. With what? What am I to help you with Eskel?
Eskel rubbed his cheek again looked at Geralt. The white-haired witcher bowed his head hiding his eyes behind his hand. Vesemir cleared his throat loudly.
At that moment the door creaked open and Ciri entered the hall. Vesemirs hawking changed into something like a wheeze a loud indrawn breath. Lambert opened his mouth. Triss suppressed a laugh.
Ciri her hair cut and styled was walking towards them with tiny steps carefully holding up a dark-blue dress – shortened and adjusted and still showing the signs of having been carried in a saddle-bag. Another present from the enchantress gleamed around the girls neck – a little black viper made of lacquered leather with a ruby eye and gold clasp.
Ciri stopped in front of Vesemir. Not quite knowing what to do with her hands she planted her thumbs behind her belt.
I cannot train today she recited in the utter silence slowly and emphatically for I am… I am…
She looked at the enchantress. Triss winked at her smirking like a rascal well pleased with his mischief and moved her lips to prompt the memorised lines.
Indisposed! ended Ciri loudly and proudly turning her nose up almost to the ceiling.
Vesemir hawked again. But Eskel dear Eskel kept his head and once more behaved as was fitting.
Of course he said casually smiling. We understand and clearly we will postpone your exercises until your indisposition has passed. We will also cut the theory short and if you feel unwell we will put it aside for the time being too. If you need any medication or—
Ill take care of that Triss cut in just as casually.
Aha… Only now did Ciri blush a little – she looked at the old witcher. Uncle Vesemir Ive asked Triss… that is Miss Merigold to… that is… Well to stay here with us. For longer. For a long time. But Triss said you have to agree forsooth. Uncle Vesemir! Say yes!
I agree… Vesemir wheezed out. Of course I agree…
We are very happy. Only now did Geralt take his hand from his forehead. We are extremely pleased Triss.
The enchantress nodded slightly towards him and innocently fluttered her eyelashes winding a chestnut lock around her finger. Geralts face seemed almost graven from stone.
You behaved very properly and politely Ciri he said offering Miss Merigold our ongoing hospitality in Kaer Morhen. I am proud of you.
Ciri reddened and smiled broadly. The enchantress gave her the next pre-arranged sign.
And now said the girl turning her nose up even higher I will leave you alone because you no doubt wish to talk over various important matters with Triss. Miss Merigold. Uncle Vesemir gentlemen… I bid you goodbye. For the time being.
She curtseyed gracefully then left the hall walking up the stairs slowly and with dignity.
Bloody hell. Lambert broke the silence. To think I didnt believe that she really is a princess.
Have you understood you idiots? Vesemir cast his eye around. If she puts a dress on in the morning I dont want to see any exercises… Understood?
Eskel and Coën bestowed a look which was entirely devoid of respect on the old man. Lambert snorted loudly. Geralt stared at the enchantress and the enchantress smiled back.
Thank you he said. Thank you Triss.
Conditions? Eskel was clearly worried. But weve already promised to ease Ciris training Triss. What other conditions do you want to impose?
Well maybe conditions isnt a very nice phrase. So let us call it advice. I will give you three pieces of advice and you are going to abide by each of them. If of course you really want me to stay and help you bring up the little one.
Were listening said Geralt. Go on Triss.
Above all she began smiling maliciously Ciris menu is to be more varied. And the secret mushrooms and mysterious greens in particular have to be limited.
Geralt and Coën controlled their expressions wonderfully Lambert and Eskel a little less so Vesemir not at all. But then she thought looking at his comically embarrassed expression in his day the world was a better place. Duplicity was a character flaw to be ashamed of. Sincerity did not bring shame.
Fewer infusions of your mystery-shrouded herbs she continued trying not to giggle and more milk. You have goats here. Milking is no great art. Youll see Lambert youll learn how to do it in no time.
Triss started Geralt listen—
No you listen. You havent subjected Ciri to violent mutations havent touched her hormones havent tried any elixirs or Grasses on her. And thats to be praised. That was sensible responsible and humane. You havent harmed her with any of your poisons – all the more so you must not cripple her now.
What are you talking about?
The mushrooms whose secrets you guard so carefully she explained do indeed keep the girl wonderfully fit and strengthen her muscles. The herbs guarantee an ideal metabolic rate and hasten her development. All this taken together and helped along by gruelling training causes certain changes in her build in her adipose tissue. Shes a woman and as you havent crippled her hormonal system do not cripple her physically now. She might hold it against you later if you so ruthlessly deprive her of her womanly… attributes. Do you understand what Im saying?
And how muttered Lambert brazenly eyeing Trisss breasts which strained against the fabric of her dress. Eskel cleared his throat and looked daggers at the young witcher.
At the moment Geralt asked slowly also gliding his eyes over this and that you havent noticed anything irreversible in her I hope?
No. She smiled. Fortunately not. She is developing healthily and normally and is built like a young dryad – its a pleasure to look at her. But I ask you to be moderate in using your accelerants.
We will promised Vesemir. Thank you for the warning child. What else? You said three… pieces of advice.
Indeed. This is the second: Ciri must not be allowed to grow wild. She has to have contact with the world. With her peers. She has to be decently educated and prepared for a normal life. Let her wave her sword about for the time being. You wont turn her into a witcher without mutation anyway but having a witchers training wont harm her. Times are hard and dangerous; shell be able to defend herself when necessary. Like an elf. But you must not bury her alive here in the middle of nowhere. She has to enter normal life.
Her normal life went up in flames along with Cintra murmured Geralt but regarding this Triss as usual youre right. Weve already thought about it. In spring Im going to take her to the Temple school. To Nenneke. To Ellander.
Thats a very good idea and a wise decision. Nenneke is an exceptional woman and Goddess Meliteles sanctuary an exceptional place. Safe sure and it guarantees an appropriate education for the girl. Does Ciri know yet?
She does. She kicked up a fuss for a few days but finally accepted the idea. Now she is even looking forward to spring with impatience excited by the prospect of an expedition to Temeria. Shes interested in the world.
So was I at her age. Triss smiled. And that comparison brings us dangerously close to the third piece of advice. The most important piece. And you already know what it is. Dont pull silly faces. Im a magician have you forgotten? I dont know how long it took you to recognise Ciris magical abilities. It took me less than half an hour. After that I knew who or rather what the girl is.
And what is she?
A Source.
Thats impossible!
Its possible. Certain even. Ciri is a Source and has mediumistic powers. What is more these powers are very very worrying. And you my dear witchers are perfectly well aware of this. Youve noticed these powers and they have worried you too. That is the one and only reason you brought me here to Kaer Morhen? Am I right? The one and only reason?
Yes Vesemir confirmed after a moments silence.
Triss breathed an imperceptible sigh of relief. For a moment she was afraid that Geralt would be the one to confirm it.
The first snow fell the following day fine snowflakes initially but soon turning into a blizzard. It fell throughout the night and in the early morning the walls of Kaer Morhen were drowned beneath a snowdrift. There could be no question of running the Killer especially since Ciri was still not feeling very well. Triss suspected that the witchers accelerants might be the cause of the girls menstrual problems. She could not be sure however knowing practically nothing about the drugs and Ciri was beyond doubt the only girl in the world to whom they had been administered. She did not share her suspicions with the witchers. She did not want to worry or annoy them and preferred to apply her own methods. She gave Ciri elixirs to drink tied a string of active jaspers around her waist under her dress and forbade her to exert herself in any way especially by chasing around wildly hunting rats with a sword.
Ciri was bored. She roamed the castle sleepily and finally for lack of any other amusement joined Coën who was cleaning the stable grooming the horses and repairing a harness.
Geralt – to the enchantresss rage – disappeared somewhere and appeared only towards evening bearing a dead goat. Triss helped him skin his prey. Although she sincerely detested the smell of meat and blood she wanted to be near the witcher. Near him. As near as possible. A cold determined resolution was growing in her. She did not want to sleep alone any longer.
Triss! yelled Ciri suddenly running down the stairs stamping. Can I sleep with you tonight? Triss please please say yes! Please Triss!
The snow fell and fell. It brightened up only with the arrival of Midinváerne the Day of the Winter Equinox.
On the third day all the children died save one a male barely ten. Hitherto agitated by a sudden madness he fell all at once into deep stupor. His eyes took on a glassy gaze; incessantly with his hands did he clutch at clothing or brandish them in the air as if desirous of catching a quill. His breathing grew loud and hoarse; sweat cold clammy and malodorous appeared on his skin. Then was he once more given elixir through the vein and the seizure it did return. This time a nose-bleed did ensue coughing turned to vomiting after which the male weakened entirely and became inert.
For two days more did symptoms not subside. The childs skin hitherto drenched in sweat grew dry and hot the pulse ceased to be full and firm – albeit remaining of average strength slow rather than fast. No more did he wake nor did he scream.
Finally came the seventh day. The male awoke and opened his eyes and his eyes were as those of a viper…
Carla Demetia Crest The Trial of Grasses and other secret Witcher practices seen with my own eyes manuscript exclusively accessible to the Chapter of Wizards
CHAPTER THREE
Your fears were unfounded entirely ungrounded. Triss grimaced resting her elbows on the table. The time when wizards used to hunt Sources and magically gifted children tearing them from their parents or guardians by force or deceit is long gone. Did you really think I might want to take Ciri away from you?
Lambert snorted and turned his face away. Eskel and Vesemir looked at Geralt and Geralt said nothing. He continued to gaze off to the side playing incessantly with his silver witcher medallion depicting the head of a snarling wolf. Triss knew the medallion reacted to magic. On such a night as Midinváerne when the air itself was vibrating with magic the witchers medallions must be practically humming. It must be both irritating and bothersome.
No child Vesemir finally said. We know you would not do such a thing. But we also know that you do ultimately have to tell the Chapter about her. Weve known for a long time that every wizard male or female is burdened with this duty. You dont take talented children from their parents and guardians any more. You observe such children so that later – at the right moment – you can fascinate them in magic influence them—
Have no fear she interrupted coldly. I will not tell anyone about Ciri. Not even the Chapter. Why are you looking at me like that?
Were amazed by the ease with which you pledge to keep this secret said Eskel calmly. Forgive me Triss I do not mean to offend you but what has happened to your legendary loyalty to the Council and Chapter?
A lot has happened. The war changed many things and the battle for Sodden Hill changed even more. I wont bore you with the politics especially as certain issues and affairs are bound by secrets I am not allowed to divulge. But as for loyalty��� I am loyal. And believe me in this matter I can be loyal to both you and to the Chapter.
Such double loyalty – Geralt looked her in the eyes for the first time that evening – is devilishly difficult to manage. Rarely does it succeed Triss.
The enchantress turned her gaze on Ciri. The girl was sitting on a bearskin with Coën tucked away in the far corner of the hall and both were busy playing a handslapping game. The game was growing monotonous as both were incredibly quick – neither could manage to slap the others hand in any way. This however clearly neither mattered to them nor spoiled their game.
Geralt she said when you found Ciri on the Yaruga you took her with you. You brought her to Kaer Morhen hid her from the world and do not let even those closest to the child know she is alive. You did this because something – about which I know nothing – convinced you that destiny exists holds sway over us and guides us in everything we do. I think the same and have always done so. If destiny wants Ciri to become a magician she will become one. Neither the Chapter nor the Council have to know about her they dont have to observe or encourage her. So in keeping your secret I wont betray the Chapter in any way. But as you know there is something of a hitch here.
Were it only one sighed Vesemir. Go on child.
The girl has magical abilities and that cant be neglected. Its too dangerous.
In what way?
Uncontrolled powers are an ominous thing. For both the Source and those in their vicinity. The Source can threaten those around them in many ways. But they threaten themselves in only one. Mental illness. Usually catatonia.
Devil take it said Lambert after a long silence. I am listening to you half-convinced that someone here has already lost their marbles and will any moment now present a threat to the rest of us. Destiny sources spells hocus-pocus… Arent you exaggerating Merigold? Is this the first child to be brought to the Keep? Geralt didnt find destiny; he found another homeless orphaned child. Well teach the girl the sword and let her out into the world like the others. True I admit weve never trained a girl in Kaer Morhen before. Weve had some problems with Ciri made mistakes and its a good thing youve pointed them out to us. But dont let us exaggerate. She is not so remarkable as to make us fall on our knees and raise our eyes to the heavens. Is there a lack of female warriors roaming the world? I assure you Merigold Ciri will leave here skilful and healthy strong and able to face life. And I warrant without catatonia or any other epilepsy. Unless you delude her into believing she has some such disease.
Vesemir Triss turned in her chair tell him to keep quiet hes getting in the way.
You think you know it all said Lambert calmly but you dont. Not yet. Look.
He stretched his hand towards the hearth arranging his fingers together in a strange way. The chimney roared and howled the flames burst out violently the glowing embers grew brighter and rained sparks. Geralt Vesemir and Eskel glanced at Ciri anxiously but the girl paid no attention to the spectacular fireworks.
Triss folded her arms and looked at Lambert defiantly.
The Sign of Aard she stated calmly. Did you think to impress me? With the use of the same sign strengthened through concentration will-power and a spell I can blow the logs from the chimney in a moment and blast them so high you will think they are stars.
You can he agreed. But Ciri cant. She cant form the Sign of Aard. Or any other sign. She has tried hundreds of times to no effect. And you know our Signs require minimal power. Ciri does not even have that. She is an absolutely normal child. She has not the least magical power – she has in fact a comprehensive lack of ability. And here you are telling us shes a Source trying to threaten us—
A Source she explained coldly has no control over their skills no command over them. They are a medium something like a transmitter. Unknowingly they get in touch with energy unknowingly they convert it. And when they try to control it when they strain trying to form the Signs perhaps nothing comes of it. And nothing will come of it not just after hundreds of attempts but after thousands. It is one characteristic of a Source. Then one day a moment comes when the Source does not exert itself does not strain is daydreaming or thinking about cabbage and sausages playing dice enjoying themselves in bed with a partner picking their nose… and suddenly something happens. A house might go up in flames. Or sometimes half a town goes up.
Youre exaggerating Merigold.
Lambert. Geralt released his medallion and rested his hands on the table. First stop calling Triss Merigold. She has asked you a number of times not to. Second Triss is not exaggerating. I saw Ciris mother Princess Pavetta in action with my own eyes. I tell you it was really something. I dont know if she was a Source or not but no one suspected she had any power at all until save by a hairs breadth she almost reduced the royal castle of Cintra to ashes.
We should assume therefore said Eskel lighting the candles in yet another candle-stick that Ciri could indeed be genetically burdened.
Not only could said Vesemir she is so burdened. On the one hand Lambert is right. Ciri is not capable of forming Signs. On the other… We have all seen…
He fell silent and looked at Ciri who with a joyful squeal acknowledged that she had the upper hand in the game. Triss spied a small smile on Coëns face and was sure he had allowed her to win.
Precisely she sneered. You have all seen. What have you seen? Under what circumstances did you see it? Dont you think boys that the time has come for more truthful confessions? Hell I repeat I will keep your secret. You have my word.
Lambert glanced at Geralt; Geralt nodded in assent. The younger witcher stood and took a large rectangular crystal carafe and a smaller phial from a high shelf. He poured the contents of the phial into the carafe shook it several times and poured the transparent liquid into the chalices on the table.
Have a drink with us Triss.
Is the truth so terrible she mocked that we cant talk about it soberly? Do I have to get drunk in order to hear it?
Dont be such a know-all. Take a sip. You will find it easier to understand.
What is it?
White Seagull.
What?
A mild remedy Eskel smiled for pleasant dreams.
Damn it! A witcher hallucinogenic? Thats why your eyes shine like that in the evenings!
White Seagull is very gentle. Its Black Seagull that is hallucinogenic.
If theres magic in this liquid Im not allowed to take it!
Exclusively natural ingredients Geralt reassured her but he looked she noticed disconcerted. He was clearly afraid she would question them about the elixirs ingredients. And diluted with a great deal of water. We would not offer you anything that could harm you.
The sparkling liquid with its strange taste struck her throat with its chill and then dispersed warmth throughout her body. The magician ran her tongue over her gums and palate. She was unable to recognise any of the ingredients.
You gave Ciri some of this… Seagull to drink she surmised. And then—
It was an accident Geralt interrupted quickly. That first evening just after we arrived… she was thirsty and the Seagull stood on the table. Before we had time to react she had drunk it all in one go. And fallen into a trance.
We had such a fright Vesemir admitted and sighed. Oh that we did child. More than we could take.
She started speaking with another voice the magician stated calmly looking at the witchers eyes gleaming in the candlelight. She started talking about events and matters of which she could have no knowledge. She started… to prophesy. Right? What did she say?
Rubbish said Lambert dryly. Senseless drivel.
Then I have no doubt – she looked straight at him – that you understood each other perfectly well. Drivel is your speciality – and I am further convinced of it every time you open your mouth. Do me a great favour and dont open it for a while all right?
This once said Eskel gravely rubbing the scar across his cheek Lambert is right Triss. After drinking Seagull Ciri really was incomprehensible. That first time it was gibberish. Only after—
He broke off. Triss shook her head.
It was only the second time that she started talking sense she guessed. So there was a second time too. Also after she drank a drug because of your carelessness?
Triss. Geralt raised his head. This is not the time for your childish spitefulness. It doesnt amuse us. It worries and upsets us. Yes there was a second time too and a third. Ciri fell quite by accident during an exercise. She lost consciousness. When she regained it she had fallen into another trance. And once again she spoke nonsense. Again it was not her voice. And again it was incomprehensible. But I have heard similar voices before heard a similar way of speaking. Its how those poor sick demented women known as oracles speak. You see what Im thinking?
Clearly. That was the second time get to the third.
Geralt wiped his brow suddenly beaded with sweat on his forearm. Ciri often wakes up at night he continued. Shouting. She has been through a lot. She does not want to talk about it but it is clear that she saw things no child should see in Cintra and Angren. I even fear that… that someone harmed her. It comes back to her in dreams. Usually she is easy to reassure and she falls asleep without any problem… But once after waking… she was in a trance again. She again spoke with someone elses unpleasant menacing voice. She spoke clearly and made sense. She prophesied. Foresaw the future. And what she foretold…
What? What Geralt?
Death Vesemir said gently. Death child.
Triss glanced at Ciri who was shrilly accusing Coën of cheating. Coën put his arms around her and burst out laughing. The magician suddenly realised that she had never up until now heard any of the witchers laugh.
For whom? she asked briefly still gazing at Coën.
Him said Vesemir.
And me Geralt added. And smiled.
When she woke up—
She remembered nothing. And we didnt ask her any questions.
Quite so. As to the prophecy… Was it specific? Detailed?
No. Geralt looked her straight in the eyes. Confused. Dont ask about it Triss. We are not worried by the contents of Ciris prophecies and ravings but about what happens to her. Were not afraid for ourselves but—
Careful warned Vesemir. Dont talk about it in front of her.
Coën approached the table carrying the girl piggy-back.
Wish everybody goodnight Ciri he said. Say goodnight to those night owls. Were going to sleep. Its nearly midnight. In a minute itll be the end of Midinváerne. As of tomorrow every day brings spring closer!
Im thirsty. Ciri slipped off his back and reached for Eskels chalice. Eskel deftly moved the vessel beyond her reach and grabbed a jug of water. Triss stood quickly.
Here you are. She gave her half-full chalice to the girl while meaningfully squeezing Geralts arm and looking Vesemir in the eye. Drink.
Triss whispered Eskel watching Ciri drink greedily what are you doing? Its—
Not a word please.
They did not have to wait long for it to take effect. Ciri suddenly grew rigid cried out and smiled a broad happy smile. She squeezed her eyelids shut and stretched out her arms. She laughed spun a pirouette and danced on tiptoes. Lambert moved the stool away in a flash leaving Coën standing between the dancing girl and the hearth.
Triss jumped up and tore an amulet from her pouch – a sapphire set in silver on a thin chain. She squeezed it tightly in her hand.
Child… groaned Vesemir. What are you doing?
I know what Im doing she said sharply. Ciri has fallen into a trance and I am going to contact her psychically. I am going to enter her. I told you she is something like a magical transmitter – Ive got to know what she is transmitting how and from where she is drawing the aura how she is transforming it. Its Midinváerne a favourable night for such an undertaking…
I dont like it. Geralt frowned. I dont like it at all.
Should either of us suffer an epileptic fit the magician said ignoring his words you know what to do. A stick between our teeth hold us down wait for it to pass. Chin up boys. Ive done this before.
Ciri ceased dancing sank to her knees extended her arms and rested her head on her lap. Triss pressed the now warm amulet to her temple and murmured the formula of a spell. She closed her eyes concentrated her willpower and gave out a burst of magic.
The sea roared waves thundered against the rocky shore and exploded in high geysers amidst the boulders. She flapped her wings chasing the salty wind. Indescribably happy she dived caught up with a flock of her companions brushed the crests of the waves with her claws soared into the sky again shedding water droplets and glided tossed by the gale whistling through her pinfeathers. Force of suggestion she thought soberly. It is only force of suggestion. Seagull!
Triiiss! Triiss!
Ciri? Where are you?
Triiiss!
The cry of the seagulls ceased. The magician still felt the wet splash of the breakers but the sea was no longer below her. Or it was – but it was a sea of grass an endless plateau stretching as far as the horizon. Triss with horror realised she was looking at the view from the top of Sodden Hill. But it was not the Hill. It could not be the Hill.
The sky suddenly grew dark shadows swirled around her. She saw a long column of indistinct figures slowly climbing down the mountainside. She heard murmurs superimposed over each other mingling into an uncanny incomprehensible chorus.
Ciri was standing nearby with her back turned to her. The wind was blowing her ashen hair about.
The indistinct hazy figures continued past in a long unending column. Passing her they turned their heads. Triss suppressed a cry watching the listless peaceful faces and their dead unseeing eyes. She did not know all of the faces did not recognise them. But some of them she did know.
Coral. Vanielle. Yoël. Pox-marked Axel…
Why have you brought me here? she whispered. Why?
Ciri turned. She raised her arm and the magician saw a trickle of blood run down her life-line across her palm and onto her wrist.
It is the rose the girl said calmly. The rose of Shaerrawedd. I pricked myself. It is nothing. It is only blood. The blood of elves…
The sky grew even darker then a moment later flared with the sharp blinding glare of lightning. Everything froze in the silence and stillness. Triss took a step wanting to make sure she could. She stopped next to Ciri and saw that both of them stood on the edge of a bottomless chasm where reddish smoke glowing as though it was lit from behind was swirling. The flash of another soundless bolt of lightning suddenly revealed a long marble staircase leading into the depths of the abyss.
It has to be this way Ciri said in a shaky voice. There is no other. Only this. Down the stairs. It has to be this way because… Vaesse deireádh aep eigean…
Speak whispered the magician. Speak child.
The Child of Elder Blood… Feainnewedd… Luned aep Hen Ichaer… Deithwen… The White Flame… No no… No!
Ciri!
The black knight… with feathers in his helmet… What did he do to me? What happened? I was frightened… Im still frightened. Its not ended it will never end. The lion cub must die… Reasons of state… No… No…
Ciri!
No! The girl turned rigid and squeezed her eyelids shut. No no I dont want to! Dont touch me!
Ciris face suddenly changed hardened; her voice became metallic cold and hostile resounding with threatening cruel mockery.
You have come all this way with her Triss Merigold? All the way here? You have come too far Fourteenth One. I warned you.
Who are you? Triss shuddered but she kept her voice under control.
You will know when the time comes.
I will know now!
The magician raised her arms extended them abruptly putting all her strength into a Spell of Identification. The magic curtain burst but behind it was a second… A third… A fourth…
Triss sank to her knees with a groan. But reality continued to burst more doors opened a long endless row leading to nowhere. To emptiness.
You are wrong Fourteenth One the metallic inhuman voice sneered. Youve mistaken the stars reflected on the surface of the lake at night for the heavens.
Do not touch— Do not touch that child!
She is not a child.
Ciris lips moved but Triss saw that the girls eyes were dead glazed and vacant.
She is not a child the voice repeated. She is the Flame the White Flame which will set light to the world. She is the Elder Blood Hen Ichaer. The blood of elves. The seed which will not sprout but burst into flame. The blood which will be defiled… When Tedd Deireádh arrives the Time of End. Vaesse deireádh aep eigean!
Are you foretelling death? shouted Triss. Is that all you can do foretell death? For everyone? Them her… Me?
You? You are already dead Fourteenth One. Everything in you has already died.
By the power of the spheres moaned the magician activating what little remained of her strength and drawing her hand through the air I throw a spell on you by water fire earth and air. I conjure you in thought in dream and in death by all that was by what is and by what will be. I cast my spell on you. Who are you? Speak!
Ciri turned her head away. The vision of the staircase leading down into the depths of the abyss disappeared dissolved and in its place appeared a grey leaden sea foaming crests of waves breaking. And the seagulls cries burst through the silence once more.
Fly said the voice through the girls lips. It is time. Go back to where you came from Fourteenth of the Hill. Fly on the wings of a gull and listen to the cry of other seagulls. Listen carefully!
I conjure you—
You cannot. Fly seagull!
And suddenly the wet salty air was there again roaring with the gale and there was the flight a flight with no beginning and no end. Seagulls cried wildly cried and commanded.
Triss?
Ciri?
Forget about him! Dont torture him! Forget! Forget Triss!
Forget!
Triss! Triss! Trisss!
Triss!
She opened her eyes tossed her head on the pillow and moved her numb hands.
Geralt?
Im here. How are you feeling?
She cast her eyes around. She was in her chamber lying on the bed. On the best bed in the whole of Kaer Morhen.
What is happening to Ciri?
She is asleep.
How long—
Too long he interrupted. He covered her with the duvet and put his arms around her. As he leaned over the wolfs head medallion swayed just above her face. What you did was not the best of ideas Triss.
Everything is all right. She trembled in his embrace. Thats not true she thought. Nothings all right. She turned her face so that the medallion didnt touch her. There were many theories about the properties of witcher amulets and none advised magicians to touch them during the Equinox.
Did… Did we say anything during the trance?
You nothing. You were unconscious throughout. Ciri… just before she woke up… said: Vaesse deireádh aep eigean.
She knows the Elder Speech?
Not enough to say a whole sentence.
A sentence which means: Something is ending. The magician wiped her face with her hand. Geralt this is a serious matter. The girl is an exceptionally powerful medium. I dont know what or who she is contacting but I think there are no limits to her connection. Something wants to take possession of her. Something which is too powerful for me. I am afraid for her. Another trance could end in mental illness. I have no control over it dont know how to cant… If it proved necessary I would not be able to block or suppress her powers; I would not even be capable if there were no other option of permanently extinguishing them. You have to get help from another magician. A more gifted one. More experienced. You know who Im talking about.
I do. He turned his head away clenched his lips.
Dont resist. Dont defend yourself. I can guess why you turned to me rather than her. Overcome your pride crush your rancour and obstinacy. There is no point to it youll torture yourself to death. And you are risking Ciris health and life in the process. Another trance is liable to be more dangerous to her than the Trial of Grasses. Ask Yennefer for help Geralt.
And you Triss?
What about me? She swallowed with difficulty. Im not important. I let you down. I let you down… in everything. I was… I was your mistake. Nothing more.
Mistakes he said with effort are also important to me. I dont cross them out of my life or memory. And I never blame others for them. You are important to me Triss and always will be. You never let me down. Never. Believe me.
She remained silent a long while.
I will stay until spring she said finally struggling against her shaking voice. I will stay with Ciri… I will watch over her. Day and night. I will be with her day and night. And when spring is here… when spring is here we will take her to Meliteles Temple in Ellander. The thing that wants to possess her might not be able to reach her in the temple. And then you will ask Yennefer for help.
All right Triss. Thank you.
Geralt?
Yes.
Ciri said something else didnt she? Something only you heard. Tell me what it was.
No he protested and his voice quivered. No Triss.
Please.
She wasnt speaking to me.
I know. She was speaking to me. Tell me please.
After coming to… When I picked her up… She whispered: Forget about him. Dont torture him.
I wont she said quietly. But I cant forget. Forgive me.
I am the one who ought to be asking for forgiveness. And not only asking you.
You love her that much she stated not asking.
That much he admitted in a whisper after a long moment of silence.
Geralt.
Yes Triss?
Stay with me tonight.
Triss…
Only stay.
All right.
Not long after Midinváerne the snow stopped falling. The frost came.
Triss stayed with Ciri day and night. She watched over her. She surrounded her with care visible and invisible.
The girl woke up shouting almost every night. She was delirious holding her cheek and crying with pain. The magician calmed her with spells and elixirs put her to sleep cuddling and rocking her in her arms. And then she herself would be unable to sleep for a long time thinking about what Ciri had said in her sleep and after she came to. And she felt a mounting fear. Vaesse deireádh aep eigean… Something is ending…
That is how it was for ten days and nights. And finally it passed. It ended disappeared without a trace. Ciri calmed she slept peacefully with no nightmares and no dreams.
But Triss kept a constant watch. She did not leave the girl for a moment. She surrounded her with care. Visible and invisible.
Faster Ciri! Lunge attack dodge! Half-pirouette thrust dodge! Balance! Balance with your left arm or youll fall from the comb! And youll hurt your… womanly attributes!
What?
Nothing. Arent you tired? Well take a break if you like.
No Lambert! I can go on. Im not that weak you know. Shall I try jumping over every other post?
Dont you dare! You might fall and then Merigold will tear my— my head off.
I wont fall!
Ive told you once and Im not going to say it again. Dont show off! Steady on your legs! And breathe Ciri breathe! Youre panting like a dying mammoth!
Thats not true!
Dont squeal. Practise! Attack dodge! Parry! Half-pirouette! Parry full pirouette! Steadier on the posts damn it! Dont wobble! Lunge thrust! Faster! Half-pirouette! Jump and cut! Thats it! Very good!
Really? Was that really very good Lambert?
Who said so?
You did! A moment ago!
Slip of the tongue. Attack! Half-pirouette! Dodge! And again! Ciri where was the parry? How many times do I have to tell you? After you dodge you always parry deliver a blow with the blade to protect your head and shoulders! Always!
Even when Im only fighting one opponent?
You never know what youre fighting. You never know whats happening behind you. You always have to cover yourself. Foot and sword work! Its got to be a reflex. Reflex understand? You mustnt forget that. You forget it in a real fight and youre finished. Again! At last! Thats it! See how such a parry lands? You can take any strike from it. You can cut backwards from it if you have to. Right show me a pirouette and a thrust backwards.
Haaa!
Very good. You see the point now? Has it got through to you?
Im not stupid!
Youre a girl. Girls dont have brains.
Lambert! If Triss heard that!
If ifs and ands were pots and pans. All right thats enough. Come down. Well take a break.
Im not tired!
But I am. I said a break. Come down from the comb.
Turning a somersault?
What do you think? Like a hen off its roost? Go on jump. Dont be afraid Im here for you.
Haaaa!
Nice. Very good – for a girl. You can take off the blindfold now.
Triss maybe thats enough for today? What do you think? Maybe we could take the sleigh and ride down the hill? The suns shining the snows sparkling so much it hurts the eyes! The weathers beautiful!
Dont lean out or youll fall from the window.
Lets go sleighing Triss!
Suggest that again in Elder Speech and well end the lesson there. Move away from the window come back to the table… Ciri how many times do I have to ask you? Stop waving that sword about and put it away.
Its my new sword! Its real a witchers sword! Made of steel which fell from heaven! Really! Geralt said so and he never lies you know that!
Oh yes. I know that.
Ive got to get used to this sword. Uncle Vesemir had it adjusted just right for my weight height and arm-length. Ive got to get my hand and wrist accustomed to it!
Accustom yourself to your hearts content but outside. Not here! Well Im listening. You wanted to suggest we get the sleigh out. In Elder Speech. So – suggest it.
Hmmm… Whats sleigh
Sledd as a noun. Aesledde as a verb.
Aha… Vaien aesledde ellea?
Dont end a question that way its impolite. You form questions using intonation.
But the children from the Islands—
Youre not learning the local Skellige jargon but classical Elder Speech.
And why am I learning the Speech tell me?
So that you know it. Its fitting to learn things you dont know. Anyone who doesnt know other languages is handicapped.
But people only speak the common tongue anyway!
True. But some speak more than just it. I warrant Ciri that it is better to count yourself amongst those few than amongst everyone. So Im listening. A full sentence: The weather today is beautiful so lets get the sleigh.
Elaine… Hmmm… Elaine tedd ataeghane a vaen aesledde?
Very good.
Ha! So lets get the sleigh.
We will. But let me finish applying my make-up.
And who are you putting make-up on for exactly?
Myself. A woman accentuates her beauty for her own self-esteem.
Hmmm… Do you know what? I feel pretty poorly too. Dont laugh Triss!
Come here. Sit on my knee. Put the sword away Ive already asked you! Thank you. Now take that large brush and powder your face. Not so much girl not so much! Look in the mirror. See how pretty you are?
I cant see any difference. Ill do my eyes all right? What are you laughing at? You always paint your eyes. I want to too.
Fine. Here you are put some shadow on your eyelids with this. Ciri dont close both your eyes or you wont see anything – youre smudging your whole face. Take a tiny bit and only skim over the eyelids. Skim I said! Let me Ill just spread it a little. Close your eyes. Now open them.
Oooo!
See the difference? A tiny bit of shadow wont do any harm even to such beautiful eyes as yours. The elves knew what they were doing when they invented eye shadow.
Elves?
You didnt know? make-up is an elvish invention. Weve learned a lot of useful things from the Elder People. And weve given bloody little back in return. Now take the pencil and draw a thin line across your upper lids just above the lashes. Ciri what are you doing?
Dont laugh! My eyelids trembling! Thats why!
Part your lips a little and itll stop trembling. See?
Ooooh!
Come on now well go and stun the witchers with our beauty. Its hard to find a prettier sight. And then well take the sleigh and smudge our make-up in the deep snowdrifts.
And well make ourselves up again!
No. Well tell Lambert to warm the bathroom and well take a bath.
Again? Lambert says were using up too much fuel with our baths.
Lambert cáen me abáeth aep arse.
What? I didnt understand…
With time youll master the idioms too. Weve still got a lot of time for studying before spring. But now… Vaen aesledde me elaine luned!
Here on this engraving… No damn it not on that one… On this one. This is as you already know a ghoul. Tell us Ciri what youve learned about ghouls… Hey look at me! What the devil have you got on your eyelids?
Greater self-esteem!
What? Never mind Im listening.
Hmm… The ghoul Uncle Vesemir is a corpse-devouring monster. It can be seen in cemeteries in the vicinity of barrows anywhere the dead are buried. At nec— necropolia. On battlegrounds on fields of battle…
So its only a danger to the dead is that right?
No not only. A ghoul may also attack the living if its hungry or falls into a fury. If for example theres a battle… A lot of people killed…
Whats the matter Ciri?
Nothing…
Ciri listen. Forget about that. That will never return.
I saw… In Sodden and in Transriver… Entire fields… They were lying there being eaten by wolves and wild dogs. Birds were picking at them… I guess there were ghouls there too…
Thats why youre learning about ghouls now Ciri. When you know about something it stops being a nightmare. When you know how to fight something it stops being so threatening. So how do you fight a ghoul Ciri?
With a silver sword. The ghoul is sensitive to silver.
And to what else?
Bright light. And fire.
So you can fight it with light and fire?
You can but its dangerous. A witcher doesnt use light or fire because it makes it harder to see. Every light creates a shadow and shadows make it harder to get your bearings. One must always fight in darkness by moon or starlight.
Quite right. Youve remembered it well clever girl. And now look here at this engraving.
Eeeueeeuuueee—
Oh well true enough it is not a beautiful cu— creature. Its a graveir. A graveir is a type of ghoul. It looks very much like a ghoul but is considerably larger. He can also be told apart as you can see by these three bony combs on his skull. The rest is the same as any other corpse-eater. Take note of the short blunt claws adapted for digging up graves and churning the earth. Strong teeth for shattering bones and a long narrow tongue used to lick the decaying marrow from them. Such stinking marrow is a delicacy for the graveir… Whats the matter?
Nnnnothing.
Youre completely pale. And green. You dont eat enough. Did you eat breakfast?
Yeeees. I diiiidddddd.
What was I… Aha. I almost forgot. Remember because this is important. Graveirs like ghouls and other monsters in this category do not have their own ecological niche. They are relicts from the age of the interpenetration of spheres. Killing them does not upset the order and interconnections of nature which prevail in our present sphere. In this sphere these monsters are foreign and there is no place for them. Do you understand Ciri?
I do Uncle Vesemir. Geralt explained it to me. I know all that. An ecological niche is—
All right thats fine. I know what it is. If Geralt has explained it to you you dont have to recite it to me. Let us return to the graveir. Graveirs appear quite rarely fortunately because theyre bloody dangerous sons-of-bitches. The smallest wound inflicted by a graveir will infect you with corpse venom. Which elixir is used to treat corpse venom poisoning Ciri?
 Golden Oriole.
Correct. But it is better to avoid infection to begin with. That is why when fighting a graveir you must never get close to the bastard. You always fight from a distance and strike from a leap.
Hmm… And wheres it best to strike one?
Were just getting to that. Look…
Once more Ciri. Well go through it slowly so that you can master each move. Now Im attacking you with tierce taking the position as if to thrust… Why are you retreating?
Because I know its a feint! You can move into a wide sinistra or strike with upper quarte. And Ill retreat and parry with a counterfeint!
Is that so? And if I do this?
Auuu! It was supposed to be slow! What did I do wrong Coën?
Nothing. Im just taller and stronger than you are.
Thats not fair!
Theres no such thing as a fair fight. You have to make use of every advantage and every opportunity that you get. By retreating you gave me the opportunity to put more force into the strike. Instead of retreating you should have executed a half-pirouette to the left and tried to cut at me from below with quarte dextra under the chin in the cheek or throat.
As if youd let me! Youll do a reverse pirouette and get my neck from the left before I can parry! How am I meant to know what youre doing?
You have to know. And you do know.
Oh sure!
Ciri what were doing is fighting. Im your opponent. I want to and have to defeat you because my life is at stake. Im taller and stronger than you so Im going to watch for opportunities to strike in order to avoid or break your parry – as youve just seen. What do I need a pirouette for? Im already in sinistra see? What could be simpler than to strike with a seconde under the arm on the inside? If I slash your artery youll be dead in a couple of minutes. Defend yourself!
Haaaa!
Very good. A beautiful quick parry. See how exercising your wrist has come in useful? And now pay attention – a lot of fencers make the mistake of executing a standing parry and freeze for a second and thats just when you can catch them out strike – like so!
Haa!
Beautiful! Now jump away jump away immediately pirouette! I could have a dagger in my left hand! Good! Very good! And now Ciri? What am I going to do now?
How am I to know?
Watch my feet! How is my body weight distributed? What can I do from this position?
Anything!
So spin spin force me to open up! Defend yourself! Good! And again! Good! And again!
Owwww!
Not so good.
Uff… What did I do wrong?
Nothing. Im just faster. Take your guards off. Well sit for a moment take a break. You must be tired youve been running the Trail all morning.
Im not tired. Im hungry.
Bloody hell so am I. And todays Lamberts turn and he cant cook anything other than noodles… If he could only cook those properly…
Coën?
Aha?
Im still not fast enough—
Youre very fast.
Will I ever be as fast as you?
I doubt it.
Hmm… And are you—? Whos the best fencer in the world?
Ive no idea.
Youve never known one?
Ive known many who believed themselves to be the best.
Oh! What were they? What were their names? What could they do?
Hold on hold on girl. I havent got an answer to those questions. Is it all that important?
Of course its important! Id like to know who these fencers are. And where they are.
Where they are? I know that.
Ah! So where?
In cemeteries.
Pay attention Ciri. Were going to attach a third pendulum now – you can manage two already. You use the same steps as for two only theres one more dodge. Ready?
Yes.
Focus yourself. Relax. Breathe in breathe out. Attack!
Ouch! Owwww… Damn it!
Dont swear. Did it hit you hard?
No it only brushed me… What did I do wrong?
You ran in at too even a pace you sped the second half-pirouette up a bit too much and your feint was too wide. And as a result you were carried straight under the pendulum.
But Geralt theres no room for a dodge and turn there! Theyre too close to each other!
Theres plenty of room I assure you. But the gaps are worked out to force you to make arrhythmic moves. This is a fight Ciri not ballet. You cant move rhythmically in a fight. You have to distract the opponent with your moves confuse his reactions. Ready for another try?
Ready. Start those damn logs swinging.
Dont swear. Relax. Attack!
Ha! Ha! Well how about that? How was that Geralt? It didnt even brush me!
And you didnt even brush the second sack with your sword. So I repeat this is a fight. Not ballet not acrobatics— What are you muttering now?
Nothing.
Relax. Adjust the bandage on your wrist. Dont grip the hilt so tightly it distracts you and upsets your equilibrium. Breathe calmly. Ready?
Yes.
Go!
Ouch! May you— Geralt its impossible! Theres not enough room for a feint and a change of foot. And when I strike from both legs without a feint…
I saw what happens when you strike without a feint. Does it hurt?
No. Not much…
Sit down next to me. Take a break.
Im not tired. Geralt Im not going to be able to jump over that third pendulum even if I rest for ten years. I cant be any faster—
And you dont have to be. Youre fast enough.
Tell me how to do it then. Half-pirouette dodge and hit at the same time?
Its very simple; you just werent paying attention. I told you before you started – an additional dodge is necessary. Displacement. An additional half-pirouette is superfluous. The second time round you did everything well and passed all the pendulums.
But I didnt hit the sack because… Geralt without a half-pirouette I cant strike because I lose speed I dont have the… the what do you call it…
Impetus. Thats true. So gain some impetus and energy. But not through a pirouette and change of foot because theres not enough time for it. Hit the pendulum with your sword.
The pendulum? Ive got to hit the sacks!
This is a fight Ciri. The sacks represent your opponents sensitive areas youve got to hit them. The pendulums – which simulate your opponents weapon – you have to avoid dodge past. When the pendulum hits you youre wounded. In a real fight you might not get up again. The pendulum mustnt touch you. But you can hit the pendulum… Why are you screwing your nose up?
Im… not going to be able to parry the pendulum with my sword. Im too weak… Ill always be too weak! Because Im a girl!
Come here girl. Wipe your nose and listen carefully. No strongman mountain-toppling giant or muscle-man is going to be able to parry a blow aimed at him by a dracolizards tail gigascorpions pincers or a griffins claws. And thats precisely the sort of weapons the pendulum simulates. So dont even try to parry. Youre not deflecting the pendulum youre deflecting yourself from it. Youre intercepting its energy which you need in order to deal a blow. A light but very swift deflection and instantaneous equally swift blow from a reverse half-turn is enough. Youre picking impetus up by rebounding. Do you see?
Mhm.
Speed Ciri not strength. Strength is necessary for a lumberjack axing trees in a forest. Thats why admittedly girls are rarely lumberjacks. Have you got that?
Mhm. Start the pendulums swinging.
Take a rest first.
Im not tired.
You know how to now? The same steps feint—
I know.
Attack!
Haaa! Ha! Haaaaa! Got you! I got you you griffin! Geraaaalt! Did you see that?
Dont yell. Control your breathing.
I did it! I really did it!! I managed it! Praise me Geralt!
Well done Ciri. Well done girl.
In the middle of February the snow disappeared whisked away by a warm wind blowing from the south from the pass.
Whatever was happening in the world the witchers did not want to know.
In the evenings consistently and determinedly Triss guided the long conversations held in the dark hall lit only by the bursts of flames in the great hearth towards politics. The witchers reactions were always the same. Geralt a hand on his forehead did not say a word. Vesemir nodded from time to time throwing in comments which amounted to little more than that in his day everything had been better more logical more honest and healthier. Eskel pretended to be polite and neither smiled nor made eye contact and even managed very occasionally to be interested in some issue or question of little importance. Coën yawned openly and looked at the ceiling and Lambert did nothing to hide his disdain.
They did not want to know anything they cared nothing for dilemmas which drove sleep from kings wizards rulers and leaders or for the problems which made councils circles and gatherings tremble and buzz. For them nothing existed beyond the passes drowning in snow or beyond the Gwenllech river carrying ice-floats in its leaden current. For them only Kaer Morhen existed lost and lonely amongst the savage mountains.
That evening Triss was irritable and restless – perhaps it was the wind howling along the great castles walls. And that evening they were all oddly excited – the witchers apart from Geralt were unusually talkative. Quite obviously they only spoke of one thing – spring. About their approaching departure for the Trail. About what the Trail would have in store for them – about vampires wyverns leshys lycanthropes and basilisks.
This time it was Triss who began to yawn and stare at the ceiling. This time she was the one who remained silent – until Eskel turned to her with a question. A question which she had anticipated.
And what is it really like in the south on the Yaruga? Is it worth going there? We wouldnt like to find ourselves in the middle of any trouble.
What do you mean by trouble?
Well you know… he stammered you keep telling us about the possibility of a new war… About constant fighting on the borders about rebellions in the lands invaded by Nilfgaard. You said theyre saying the Nilfgaardians might cross the Yaruga again—
So what? said Lambert. Theyve been hitting killing and striking against each other constantly for hundreds of years. Its nothing to worry about. Ive already decided – Im going to the far South to Sodden Mahakam and Angren. Its well known that monsters abound wherever armies have passed. The most money is always made in places like that.
True Coën acknowledged. The neighbourhood grows deserted only women who cant fend for themselves remain in the villages… scores of children with no home or care roaming around… Easy prey attracts monsters.
And the lord barons and village elders added Eskel have their heads full of the war and dont have the time to defend their subjects. They have to hire us. Its true. But from what Triss has been telling us all these evenings it seems the conflict with Nilfgaard is more serious than that not just some local little war. Is that right Triss?
Even if it were the case said the magician spitefully surely that suits you? A serious bloody war will lead to more deserted villages more widowed women simply hordes of orphaned children—
I cant understand your sarcasm. Geralt took his hand away from his forehead. I really cant Triss.
Nor I my child. Vesemir raised his head. What do you mean? Are you thinking about the widows and children? Lambert and Coën speak frivolously as youngsters do but it is not the words that are important. After all they—
…they defend these children she interrupted crossly. Yes I know. From the werewolf who might kill two or three a year while a Nilfgaardian foray can kill and burn an entire settlement in an hour. Yes you defend orphans. While I fight that there should be as few of those orphans as possible. Im fighting the cause not the effect. Thats why Im on Foltest of Temerias council and sit with Fercart and Keira Metz. We deliberate on how to stop war from breaking out and should it come to it how to defend ourselves. Because war is constantly hovering over us like a vulture. For you its an adventure. For me its a game in which the stakes are survival. Im involved in this game and thats why your indifference and frivolity hurt and insult me.
Geralt sat up and looked at her.
Were witchers Triss. Cant you understand that?
Whats there to understand? The enchantress tossed her chestnut mane back. Everythings crystal-clear. Youve chosen a certain attitude to the world around you. The fact that this world might at any moment fall to pieces has a place in this choice. In mine it doesnt. Thats where we differ.
Im not sure its only there we differ.
The world is falling to ruins she repeated. We can watch it happen and do nothing. Or we can counteract it.
How? He smiled derisively. With our emotions?
She did not answer turning her face to the fire roaring in the hearth.
The world is falling to ruins repeated Coën nodding his head in feigned thoughtfulness. How many times Ive heard that.
Me too Lambert grimaced. And its not surprising – its a popular saying of late. Its what kings say when it turns out that a modicum of brains is necessary to rule after all. Its what merchants say when greed and stupidity have led them to bankruptcy. Its what wizards say when they start to lose their influence on politics or income. And the person theyre speaking to should expect some sort of proposal straight away. So cut the introduction short Triss and present us with your proposition.
Verbal squabbling has never amused me the enchantress declared gauging him with cold eyes or displays of eloquence which mock whoever youre talking to. I dont intend to take part in anything like that. You know only too well what I mean. You want to hide your heads in the sand thats your business. But coming from you Geralt its a great surprise.
Triss. The white-haired witcher looked her straight in the eyes again. What do you expect from me? To take an active part in the fight to save a world which is falling to pieces? Am I to enlist in the army and stop Nilfgaard? Should I if it comes to another battle for Sodden stand with you on the Hill shoulder to shoulder and fight for freedom?
Id be proud she said quietly lowering her head. Id be proud and happy to fight at your side.
I believe that. But Im not gallant enough. Nor valiant enough. Im not suited to be a soldier or a hero. And having an acute fear of pain mutilation and death is not the only reason. You cant stop a soldier from being frightened but you can give him motivation to help him overcome that fear. I have no such motivation. I cant have. Im a witcher: an artificially created mutant. I kill monsters for money. I defend children when their parents pay me to. If Nilfgaardian parents pay me Ill defend Nilfgaardian children. And even if the world lies in ruin – which does not seem likely to me – Ill carry on killing monsters in the ruins of this world until some monster kills me. That is my fate my reason my life and my attitude to the world. And it is not what I chose. It was chosen for me.
Youre embittered she stated tugging nervously at a strand of hair. Or pretending to be. You forget that I know you so dont play the unfeeling mutant devoid of a heart of scruples and of his own free will in front of me. And the reasons for your bitterness I can guess and understand. Ciris prophecy correct?
No not correct he answered icily. I see that you dont know me at all. Im afraid of death just like everyone else but I grew used to the idea of it a very long time ago – Im not under any illusions. Im not complaining about fate Triss – this is plain cold calculation. Statistics. No witcher has yet died of old age lying in bed dictating his will. Not a single one. Ciri didnt surprise or frighten me. I know Im going to die in some cave which stinks of carcases torn apart by a griffin lamia or manticore. But I dont want to die in a war because theyre not my wars.
Im surprised at you she replied sharply. Im surprised that youre saying this surprised by your lack of motivation as you learnedly chose to describe your supercilious distance and indifference. You were at Sodden Angren and Transriver. You know what happened to Cintra know what befell Queen Calanthe and many thousands of people there. You know the hell Ciri went through know why she cries out at night. And I know too because I was also there. Im afraid of pain and death too even more so now than I was then – I have good reason. As for motivation it seems to me that back then I had just as little as you. Why should I a magician care about the fates of Sodden Brugge Cintra or other kingdoms? The problems of having more or less competent rulers? The interests of merchants and barons? I was a magician. I too could have said it wasnt my war that I could mix elixirs for the Nilfgaardians on the ruins of the world. But I stood on that Hill next to Vilgefortz next to Artaud Terranova next to Fercart next to Enid Findabair and Philippa Eilhart next to your Yennefer. Next to those who no longer exist – Coral Yoël Vanielle… There was a moment when out of sheer terror I forgot all my spells except for one – and thanks to that spell I could have teleported myself from that horrific place back home to my tiny little tower in Maribor. There was a moment when I threw up from fear when Yennefer and Coral held me up by the shoulders and hair—
Stop. Please stop.
No Geralt. I wont. After all you want to know what happened there on the Hill. So listen – there was a din and flames there were flaming arrows and exploding balls of fire there were screams and crashes and I suddenly found myself on the ground on a pile of charred smoking rags and I realised that the pile of rags was Yoël and that thing next to her that awful thing that trunk with no arms and no legs which was screaming so horrifically was Coral. And I thought the blood in which I was lying was Corals blood. But it was my own. And then I saw what they had done to me and I started to howl howl like a beaten dog like a battered child— Leave me alone! Dont worry Im not going to cry. Im not a little girl from a tiny tower in Maribor any more. Damn it Im Triss Merigold the Fourteenth One Killed at Sodden. There are fourteen graves at the foot of the obelisk on the Hill but only thirteen bodies. Youre amazed such a mistake could have been made? Most of the corpses were in hard-to-recognise pieces – no one identified them. The living were hard to account for too. Of those who had known me well Yennefer was the only one to survive and Yennefer was blind. Others knew me fleetingly and always recognised me by my beautiful hair. And I damn it didnt have it any more!
Geralt held her closer. She no longer tried to push him away.
They used the highest magics on us she continued in a muted voice spells elixirs amulets and artefacts. Nothing was left wanting for the wounded heroes of the Hill. We were cured patched up our former appearances returned to us our hair and sight restored. You can hardly see the marks. But I will never wear a plunging neckline again Geralt. Never.
The witchers said nothing. Neither did Ciri who had slipped into the hall without a sound and stopped at the threshold hunching her shoulders and folding her arms.
So the magician said after a while dont talk to me about motivation. Before we stood on that Hill the Chapter simply told us: That is what you have to do. Whose war was it? What were we defending there? The land? The borders? The people and their cottages? The interests of kings? The wizards influence and income? Order against Chaos? I dont know! But we defended it because thats what had to be done. And if the need arises Ill stand on the Hill again. Because if I dont it will make the sacrifices made the first time futile and unnecessary.
Ill stand beside you! shouted Ciri shrilly. Just wait and see Ill stand with you! Those Nilfgaardians are going to pay for my grandmother pay for everything… I havent forgotten!
Be quiet growled Lambert. Dont butt into grownups conversations—
Oh sure! The girl stamped her foot and in her eyes a green fire kindled. Why do you think Im learning to fight with a sword? I want to kill him that black knight from Cintra with wings on his helmet for what he did to me for making me afraid! And Im going to kill him! Thats why Im learning it!
And therefore youll stop learning said Geralt in a voice colder than the walls of Kaer Morhen. Until you understand what a sword is and what purpose it serves in a witchers hand you will not pick one up. You are not learning in order to kill and be killed. You are not learning to kill out of fear and hatred but in order to save lives. Your own and those of others.
The girl bit her lip shaking from agitation and anger.
Understood?
Ciri raised her head abruptly. No.
Then youll never understand. Get out.
Geralt I—
Get out.
Ciri spun on her heel and stood still for a moment undecided as if waiting – waiting for something that could not happen. Then she ran swiftly up the stairs. They heard the door slam.
Too severe Wolf said Vesemir. Much too severe. And you shouldnt have done it in Trisss presence. The emotional ties—
Dont talk to me about emotions. Ive had enough of all this talk about emotions!
And why is that? The magician smiled derisively and coldly. Why Geralt? Ciri is normal. She has normal feelings she accepts emotions naturally takes them for what they really are. You obviously dont understand and are therefore surprised by them. It surprises and irritates you. The fact that someone can experience normal love normal hatred normal fear pain and regret normal joy and normal sadness. That it is coolness distance and indifference which are considered abnormal. Oh yes Geralt it annoys you it annoys you so much that you are starting to think about Kaer Morhens vaults about the Laboratorium the dusty demi-johns full of mutagenic poisons—
Triss! called Vesemir gazing at Geralts face suddenly grown pale. But the enchantress refused to be interrupted and spoke faster and faster louder and louder.
Who do you want to deceive Geralt? Me? Her? Or maybe yourself? Maybe you dont want to admit the truth a truth everyone knows except you? Maybe you dont want to accept the fact that human emotions and feelings werent killed in you by the elixirs and Grasses! You killed them! You killed them yourself! But dont you dare kill them in the child!
Silence! he shouted leaping from the chair. Silence Merigold!
He turned away and lowered his arms defencelessly. Sorry he said quietly. Forgive me Triss. He made for the stairs quickly but the enchantress was up in a flash and threw herself at him embracing him.
You are not leaving here alone she whispered. I wont let you be alone. Not right now.
They knew immediately where she had run to. Fine wet snow had fallen that evening and had covered the forecourt with a thin impeccably white carpet. In it they saw her footsteps.
Ciri was standing on the very summit of the ruined wall as motionless as a statue. She was holding the sword above her right shoulder the cross-guard at eye level. The fingers of her left hand were lightly touching the pommel.
On seeing them the girl jumped spun in a pirouette and landed softly in an identical but reverse mirror position.
Ciri said the witcher come down please.
It seemed she hadnt heard him. She did not move not even a muscle. Triss however saw the reflection of the moon thrown across her face by the blade glisten silver over a stream of tears.
No ones going to take the sword away from me! she shouted. No one! Not even you!
Come down repeated Geralt.
She tossed her head defiantly and the next second leaped once more. A loose brick slipped beneath her foot with a grating sound. Ciri staggered trying to find her balance. And failed.
The witcher jumped.
Triss raised her hand opening her mouth to utter a formula for levitation. She knew she couldnt do it in time. She knew that Geralt would not make it. It was impossible.
Geralt did make it.
He was forced down to the ground thrown on his knees and back. He fell. But he did not let go of Ciri.
The magician approached them slowly. She heard the girl whisper and sniff. Geralt too was whispering. She could not make out the words. But she understood their meaning.
A warm wind howled in the crevices of the wall. The witcher raised his head.
Spring he said quietly.
Yes she acknowledged swallowing. There is still snow in the passes but in the valleys… In the valleys it is already spring. Shall we leave Geralt? You Ciri and I?
Yes. It is high time.
Upriver we saw their towns as delicate as if they were woven from the morning mist out of which they loomed. It seemed as if they would disappear a moment later blown away on the wind which rippled the surface of the water. There were little palaces white as nenuphar flowers; there were little towers looking as though they were plaited out of ivy; there were bridges as airy as weeping willows. And there were other things for which we could find no word or name. Yet we already had names for everything which our eyes beheld in this new reborn world. Suddenly in the far recesses of our memories we found the words for dragons and griffins mermaids and nymphs sylphs and dryads once more. For the white unicorns which drank from the river at dusk inclining their slender necks towards the water. We named everything. And everything seemed to be close to our hearts familiar to us ours.
Apart from them. They although so resembling us were alien. So very alien that for a long time we could find no word for their strangeness.
Hen Gedymdeith Elves and Humans
A good elf is a dead elf.
Marshal Milan Raupenneck
CHAPTER FOUR
The misfortune behaved in the eternal manner of misfortunes and hawks – it hung over them for some while waiting for an appropriate moment before it attacked. It chose its moment when they had passed the few settlements on the Gwenllech and Upper Buina passed Ard Carraigh and plunged into the forest below deserted and intersected by gorges. Like a hawk striking this misfortunes aim was true. It fell accurately upon its victim and its victim was Triss.
Initially it seemed nasty but not too serious resembling an ordinary stomach upset. Geralt and Ciri discreetly tried to take no notice of the stops the enchantresss ailment necessitated. Triss as pale as death beaded with sweat and painfully contorted tried to continue riding for several hours longer but at about midday and having spent an abnormally long time in the bushes by the road she was no longer in any condition to sit on a saddle. Ciri tried to help her but to no avail – the enchantress unable to hold on to the horses mane slid down her mounts flank and collapsed to the ground.
They picked her up and laid her on a cloak. Geralt unstrapped the saddle-bags without a word found a casket containing some magic elixirs opened it and cursed. All the phials were identical and the mysterious signs on the seals meant nothing to him.
Which one Triss?
None of them she moaned with both hands on her belly. I cant… I cant take them.
What? Why?
Im sensitised—
You? A magician?
Im allergic! she sobbed with helpless exasperation and despairing anger. I always have been! I cant tolerate elixirs! I can treat others with them but can only treat myself with amulets.
Where is the amulet?
I dont know. She ground her teeth. I must have left it in Kaer Morhen. Or lost it—
Damn it. What are we going to do? Maybe you should cast a spell on yourself?
Ive tried. And this is the result. I cant concentrate because of this cramp…
Dont cry.
Easy for you to say!
The witcher got up pulled his saddle-bags from Roachs back and began rummaging through them. Triss curled up her face contracted and her lips twisted in a spasm of pain.
Ciri…
Yes Triss?
Do you feel all right? No… unusual sensations?
The girl shook her head.
Maybe its food poisoning? What did I eat? But we all ate the same thing… Geralt! Wash your hands. Make sure Ciri washes her hands…
Calm down. Drink this.
What is it?
Ordinary soothing herbs. Theres next to no magic in them so they shouldnt do you any harm. And theyll relieve the cramps.
Geralt the cramps… theyre nothing. But if I run a fever… It could be… dysentery. Or paratyphoid.
Arent you immune?
Triss turned her head away without replying bit her lip and curled up even tighter. The witcher did not pursue the question.
Having allowed her to rest for a while they hauled the enchantress onto Roachs saddle. Geralt sat behind her supporting her with both hands while Ciri rode beside them holding the reins and leading Trisss gelding. They did not even manage a mile. The enchantress kept falling from Geralts hands; she could not stay in the saddle. Suddenly she started trembling convulsively and instantly burned with a fever. The gastritis had grown worse. Geralt told himself that it was an allergic reaction to the traces of magic in his witchers elixir. He told himself that. But he did not believe it.
Oh sir said the sergeant you have not come at a good time. Indeed you could not have arrived at a worse moment.
The sergeant was right. Geralt could neither contest it nor argue.
The fort guarding the bridge where there would usually be three soldiers a stable-boy a tollcollector and – at most – a few passers-by was swarming with people. The witcher counted over thirty lightly armed soldiers wearing the colours of Kaedwen and a good fifty shield bearers camping around the low palisade. Most of them were lying by campfires in keeping with the old soldiers rule which dictates that you sleep when you can and get up when youre woken. Considerable activity could be seen through the thrown-open gates – there were a lot of people and horses inside the fort too. At the top of the little leaning lookout tower two soldiers were on duty with their crossbows permanently at the ready. On the worn bridge trampled by horses hooves six peasant carts and two merchant wagons were parked. In the enclosure their heads lowered sadly over the mud and manure stood umpteen unyoked oxen.
There was an assault on the fort – last night. The sergeant anticipated his question. We just got here in time with the relief troops – otherwise wed have found nothing here but charred earth.
Who were your attackers? Bandits? Marauders?
The soldier shook his head spat and looked at Ciri and Triss huddled in the saddle.
Come inside he said your Enchantress is going to fall out of her saddle any minute now. We already have some wounded men there; one more wont make much difference.
In the yard in an open roofed shelter lay several people with their wounds dressed with bloodied bandages. A little further between the palisade fence and a wooden well with a sweep Geralt made out six still bodies wrapped in sacking from which only pairs of feet in worn dirty boots protruded.
Lay her there by the wounded men. The soldier indicated the shelter. Oh sir it truly is bad luck shes sick. A few of our men were hurt during the battle and we wouldnt turn down a bit of magical assistance. When we pulled the arrow out of one of them its head stuck in his guts. The lad will peter out by the morning hell peter out like anything… And the enchantress who could have saved him is tossing and turning with a fever and seeking help from us. A bad time I say a bad time—
He broke off seeing that the witcher could not tear his eyes from the sacking-wrapped bodies.
Two guards from here two of our relief troops and two… two of the others he said pulling up a corner of the stiff material. Take a look if you wish.
Ciri step away.
I want to see too! The girl leaned out around him staring at the corpses with her mouth open.
Step away please. Take care of Triss.
Ciri huffed unwilling but obeyed. Geralt came closer.
Elves he noted not hiding his surprise.
Elves the soldier confirmed. Scoiatael.
Who?
Scoiatael repeated the soldier. Forest bands.
Strange name. It means Squirrels if Im not mistaken?
Yes sir. Squirrels. Thats what they call themselves in elvish. Some say its because sometimes they wear squirrel tails on their fur caps and hats. Others say its because they live in the woods and eat nuts. Theyre getting more and more troublesome I tell you.
Geralt shook his head. The soldier covered the bodies again and wiped his hands on his tunic.
Come he said. Theres no point standing here. Ill take you to the commandant. Our corporal will take care of your patient if he can. He knows how to sear and stitch wounds and set bones so maybe he knows how to mix up medicines and what not too. Hes a brainy chap a mountain-man. Come witcher.
In the dim smoky toll-collectors hut a lively and noisy discussion was underway. A knight with closely cropped hair wearing a habergeon and yellow surcoat was shouting at two merchants and a greeve watched by the toll-collector who had an indifferent rather gloomy expression and whose head was wrapped in bandages.
I said no! The knight thumped his fist on the rickety table and stood up straight adjusting the gorget across his chest. Until the patrols return youre not going anywhere! You are not going to roam the highways!
Is to be in Daevon in two days! the greeve yelled shoving a short notched stick with a symbol branded into it under the knights nose. I have a transport to lead! The bailiffs going to have me head if it be late! Ill complain to the voivode!
Go ahead and complain sneered the knight. But I advise you to line your breeches with straw before you do because the voivode can do a mean bit of arse-kicking. But for the time being I give the orders here – the voivode is far away and your bailiff means no more to me than a heap of dung. Hey Unist! Who are you bringing here sergeant? Another merchant?
No answered the sergeant reluctantly. A witcher sir. He goes by the name Geralt of Rivia.
To Geralts astonishment the knight gave a broad smile approached and held a hand out in greeting.
Geralt of Rivia he repeated still smiling. I have heard about you and not just from gossip and hearsay. What brings you here?
Geralt explained what brought him there. The knights smile faded.
You have not come at a good time. Or to a good place. We are at war here witcher. A band of Scoiatael is doing the rounds and there was a skirmish yesterday. I am waiting here for relief forces and then well start a counterattack.
Youre fighting elves?
Not just elves! Is it possible? Have you a witcher not heard of the Squirrels?
No. I havent.
Where have you been these past two years? Beyond the seas? Here in Kaedwen the Scoiatael have made sure everybodys talking about them theyve seen to it only too well. The first bands appeared just after the war with Nilfgaard broke out. The cursed non-humans took advantage of our difficulties. We were fighting in the south and they began a guerrilla campaign at our rear. They counted on the Nilfgaardians defeating us started declaring it was the end of human rule and there would be a return to the old order. Humans to the sea! Thats their battle cry as they murder burn and plunder!
Its your own fault and your own problem the greeve commented glumly tapping his thigh with the notched stick a mark of his position. Yours and all the other noblemen and knights. Youre the ones who oppressed the non-humans would not allow them their way of life so now you pay for it. While weve always moved goods this way and no one stopped us. We didnt need an army.
Whats true is true said one of the merchants who had been sitting silently on a bench. The Squirrels are no fiercer than the bandits who used to roam these ways. And who did the elves take in hand first? The bandits!
What do I care if its a bandit or an elf who runs me through with an arrow from behind some bushes? the toll-collector with the bandaged head said suddenly. The thatch if its set on fire above my head in the night burns just the same. What difference does it make who lit the fire-brand? You say sir that the Scoiatael are no worse than the bandits? You lie. The bandits wanted loot but the elves are after human blood. Not everyone has ducats but we all have blood running through our veins. You say its the nobilitys problem greeve? Thats an even greater folly. What about the lumberjacks shot in the clearing the tar-makers hacked to pieces at the Beeches the refugee peasants from the burned down hamlets did they hurt the non-humans? They lived and worked together as neighbours and suddenly they got an arrow in the back… And me? Never in my life have I harmed a non-human and look my head is broken open by a dwarfs cutlass. And if it were not for the soldiers youre snapping at I would be lying beneath an ell of turf—
Exactly! The knight in the yellow surcoat thumped his fist against the table once again. We are protecting your mangy skin greeve from those as you call them oppressed elves who according to you we did not let live. But I will say something different – we have emboldened them too much. We tolerated them treated them as humans as equals and now they are stabbing us in the back. Nilfgaard is paying them for it Id stake my life and the savage elves from the mountains are furnishing them with arms. But their real support comes from those who always lived amongst us – from the elves half-elves dwarves gnomes and halflings. They are the ones who are hiding them feeding them supplying them with volunteers—
Not all of them said another merchant slim with a delicate and noble face – in no way a typical merchants features. The majority of non-humans condemn the Squirrels sir and want nothing to do with them. The majority of them are loyal and sometimes pay a high price for that loyalty. Remember the burgomaster from Ban Ard. He was a half-elf who urged peace and co-operation. He was killed by an assassins arrow.
Aimed no doubt by a neighbour some halfling or dwarf who also feigned loyalty scoffed the knight. If you ask me none of them are loyal! Every one of them— Hey there! Who are you?
Geralt looked around. Ciri stood right behind him casting her huge emerald eyes over everyone. As far as the ability to move noiselessly was concerned she had clearly made enormous progress.
Shes with me he explained.
Hmmm… The knight measured Ciri with his eyes then turned back to the merchant with the noble face evidently considering him the most serious partner in the discussion. Yes sir do not talk to me about loyal non-humans. They are all our enemies its just that some are better than others at pretending otherwise. Halflings dwarves and gnomes have lived amongst us for centuries – in some sort of harmony it would seem. But it sufficed for the elves to lift their heads and all the others grabbed their weapons and took to the woods too. I tell you it was a mistake to tolerate the free elves and dryads with their forests and their mountain enclaves. It wasnt enough for them and now theyre yelling: Its our world! Begone strangers!. By the gods well show them who will be gone and of which race even the slightest traces will be wiped away. We beat the hides off the Nilfgaardians and now we will do something about these rogue bands.
Its not easy to catch an elf in the woods said the witcher. Nor would I go after a gnome or dwarf in the mountains. How large are these units?
Bands corrected the knight. Theyre bands witcher. They can count up to a hundred heads sometimes more. They call each pack a commando. Its a word borrowed from the gnomes. And in saying they are hard to catch you speak truly. Evidently you are a professional. Chasing them through the woods and thickets is senseless. The only way is to cut them off from their supplies isolate them starve them out. Seize the non-humans who are helping them firmly by the scruff of their necks. Those from the towns and settlements villages and farms—
The problem is said the merchant with noble features that we still dont know which of the non-humans are helping them and which arent.
Then we have to seize them all!
Ah. The merchant smiled. I understand. Ive heard that somewhere before. Take everyone by the scruff of their neck and throw them down the mines into enclosed camps into quarries. Everyone. The innocent too. Women and children. Is that right?
The knight raised his head and slammed his hand down on his sword hilt.
Just so and no other way! he said sharply. You pity the children yet youre like a child yourself in this world dear sir. A truce with Nilfgaard is a very fragile thing like an egg-shell. If not today then the war might start anew tomorrow and anything can happen in war. If they defeated us what do you think would happen? Ill tell you what – elven commandos would emerge from the forests theyd emerge strong and numerous and these loyal elements would instantly join them. Those loyal dwarves of yours your friendly halflings do you think they are going to talk of peace of reconciliation then? No sir. Theyll be tearing our guts out. Nilfgaard is going to deal with us through their hands. And theyll drown us in the sea just as they promise. No sir we must not pussyfoot around them. Its either them or us. Theres no third way!
The door of the hut squeaked and a soldier in a bloodied apron stood in the doorway.
Forgive me for disturbing you he hawked. Which of you noble sirs be the one who brought this sick woman here?
I did said the witcher. Whats happened?
Come with me please.
They went out into the courtyard.
It bodes not well with her sir said the soldier indicating Triss. Firewater with pepper and saltpetre I gave her – but it be no good. I dont really…
Geralt made no comment because there was nothing to say. The magician doubled over was clear evidence of the fact that firewater with pepper and saltpetre was not something her stomach could tolerate.
It could be some plague. The soldier frowned. Or that whats it called… Zintery. If it were to spread to our men—
She is a wizard protested the witcher. Wizards dont fall sick…
Just so the knight who had followed them out threw in cynically. Yours as I see is just emanating good health. Geralt listen to me. The woman needs help and we cannot offer such. Nor can I risk an epidemic amongst my troops. You understand.
I understand. I will leave immediately. I have no choice – I have to turn back towards Daevon or Ard Carraigh.
You wont get far. The patrols have orders to stop everyone. Besides it is dangerous. The Scoiatael have gone in exactly that direction.
Ill manage.
From what Ive heard about you – the knights lips twisted – I have no doubt you would. But bear in mind you are not alone. You have a gravely sick woman on your shoulders and this brat…
Ciri who was trying to clean her dung-smeared boot on a ladder rung raised her head. The knight cleared his throat and looked down. Geralt smiled faintly. Over the last two years Ciri had almost forgotten her origins and had almost entirely lost her royal manners and airs but her glare when she wanted was very much like that of her grandmother. So much so that Queen Calanthe would no doubt have been very proud of her granddaughter.
Yeeessss what was I… the knight stammered tugging at his belt with embarrassment. Geralt sir I know what you need to do. Cross beyond the river south. You will catch up with a caravan which is following the trail. Night is just around the corner and the caravan is certain to stop for a rest. You will reach it by dawn.
What kind of caravan?
I dont know. The knight shrugged. But it is not a merchant or an ordinary convoy. Its too orderly the wagons are all the same all covered… A royal bailiffs no doubt. I allowed them to cross the bridge because they are following the Trail south probably towards the fords on the Lixela.
Hmmm… The witcher considered this looking at Triss. That would be on my way. But will I find help there?
Maybe yes the knight said coldly. Maybe no. But you wont find it here thats for sure.
They did not hear or see him as he approached engrossed as they were in conversation sitting around a campfire which with its yellow light cadaverously illuminated the canvas of the wagons arranged in a circle. Geralt gently pulled up his mare and forced her to neigh loudly. He wanted to warn the caravan which had set up camp for the night wanted to temper the surprise of having visitors and avoid a nervous reaction. He knew from experience that the release mechanisms on crossbows did not like nervous moves.
The campers leaped up and despite his warning performed numerous agitated movements. Most of them he saw at once were dwarves. This reassured him somewhat – dwarves although extremely irascible usually asked questions first in situations such as these and only then aimed their crossbows.
Whos that? shouted one of the dwarves hoarsely and with a swift energetic move prised an axe from a stump by the campfire. Who goes there?
A friend. The witcher dismounted.
I wonder whose growled the dwarf. Come closer. Hold your hands out so we can see them.
Geralt approached holding his hands out so they could be seen even by someone afflicted with conjunctivitis or night blindness.
Closer.
He obeyed. The dwarf lowered his axe and tilted his head a little.
Either my eyes deceive me he said or its the witcher Geralt of Rivia. Or someone who looks damn like him.
The fire suddenly shot up into flames bursting into a golden brightness which drew faces and figures from the dark.
Yarpen Zigrin declared Geralt astonished. None other than Yarpen Zigrin in person complete with beard!
Ha! The dwarf waved his axe as if it were an osier twig. The blade whirred in the air and cut into a stump with a dull thud. Call the alarm off! This truly is a friend!
The rest of the gathering visibly relaxed and Geralt thought he heard deep sighs of relief. The dwarf walked up to him holding out his hand. His grip could easily rival a pair of iron pincers.
Welcome you warlock he said. Wherever youve come from and wherever youre going welcome. Boys! Over here! You remember my boys witcher? This is Yannick Brass this ones Xavier Moran and heres Paulie Dahlberg and his brother Regan.
Geralt didnt remember any of them and besides they all looked alike bearded stocky practically square in their thick quilted jerkins.
There were six of you one by one he squeezed the hard gnarled hands offered him if I remember correctly.
Youve a good memory laughed Yarpen Zigrin. There were six of us indeed. But Lucas Corto got married settled down in Mahakam and dropped out of the company the stupid oaf. Somehow we havent managed to find anybody worthy of his place yet. Pity six is just right not too many not too few. To eat a calf knock back a barrel theres nothing like six—
As I see with a nod Geralt indicated the rest of the group standing undecided by the wagons there are enough of you here to manage three calves not to mention a quantity of poultry. Whats this gang of fellows youre commanding Yarpen?
Im not the one in command. Allow me to introduce you. Forgive me Wenck for not doing so straight away but me and my boys have known Geralt of Rivia for a long time – weve a fair number of shared memories behind us. Geralt this is Commissar Vilfrid Wenck in the service of King Henselt of Ard Carraigh the merciful ruler of Kaedwen.
Vilfrid Wenck was tall taller than Geralt and near twice the dwarfs height. He wore an ordinary simple outfit like that worn by greeves bailiffs or mounted messengers but there was a sharpness in his movements a stiffness and sureness which the witcher knew and could faultlessly recognise even at night even in the meagre light of the campfire. That was how men accustomed to wearing hauberks and belts weighed down with weapons moved. Wenck was a professional soldier. Geralt was prepared to wager any sum on it. He shook the proffered hand and gave a little bow.
Lets sit down. Yarpen indicated the stump where his mighty axe was still embedded. Tell us what youre doing in this neighbourhood Geralt.
Looking for help. Im journeying in a threesome with a woman and youngster. The woman is sick. Seriously sick. I caught up with you to ask for help.
Damn it we dont have a medic here. The dwarf spat at the flaming logs. Where have you left them?
Half a furlong from here by the roadside.
You lead the way. Hey you there! Three to the horses saddle the spare mounts! Geralt will your sick woman hold up in the saddle?
Not really. Thats why I had to leave her there.
Get the sheepskin canvas sheet and two poles from the wagon! Quick!
Vilfrid Wenck crossing his arms hawked loudly.
Were on the trail Yarpen Zigrin said sharply without looking at him. You dont refuse help on the Trail.
Damn it. Yarpen removed his palm from Trisss forehead. Shes as hot as a furnace. I dont like it. What if its typhoid or dysentery?
It cant be typhoid or dysentery Geralt lied with conviction wrapping the horse blankets around the sick woman. Wizards are immune to those diseases. Its food poisoning nothing contagious.
Hmm… Well all right. Ill rummage through the bags. I used to have some good medicine for the runs maybe theres still a little left.
Ciri muttered the witcher passing her a sheepskin unstrapped from the horse go to sleep youre barely on your feet. No not in the wagon. Well put Triss in the wagon. You lie down next to the fire.
No she protested quietly watching the dwarf walk away. Im going to lie down next to her. When they see you keeping me away from her they wont believe you. Theyll think its contagious and chase us away like the soldiers in the fort.
Geralt? the enchantress moaned suddenly. Where… are we?
Amongst friends.
Im here said Ciri stroking her chestnut hair. Im at your side. Dont be afraid. You feel how warm it is here? A campfires burning and a dwarf is just going to bring some medicine for… For your stomach.
Geralt sobbed Triss trying to disentangle herself from the blankets. No… no magic elixirs remember…
I remember. Lie peacefully.
Ive got to… Oooh…
The witcher leaned over without a word picked up the enchantress together with her cocoon of caparisons and blankets and marched to the woods into the darkness. Ciri sighed.
She turned hearing heavy panting. Behind the wagon appeared the dwarf hefting a considerable bundle under his arm. The campfire flame gleamed on the blade of the axe behind his belt; the rivets on his heavy leather jerkin also glistened.
Wheres the sick one? he snarled. Flown away on a broomstick?
Ciri pointed to the darkness.
Right. The dwarf nodded. I know the pain and Ive known the same nasty complaint. When I was younger I used to eat everything I managed to find or catch or cut down so I got food poisoning many a time. Who is she this Enchantress?
Triss Merigold.
I dont know her never heard of her. I rarely have anything to do with the Brotherhood anyway. Well but its polite to introduce oneself. Im called Yarpen Zigrin. And what are you called little goose?
Something other than Little Goose snarled Ciri with a gleam in her eyes.
The dwarf chuckled and bared his teeth.
Ah. He bowed with exaggeration. I beg your forgiveness. I didnt recognise you in the darkness. This isnt a goose but a noble young lady. I fall at your feet. What is the young ladys name if its no secret?
Its no secret. Im Ciri.
Ciri. Aha. And who is the young lady?
That Ciri turned her nose up proudly is a secret.
Yarpen snorted again.
The young ladys little tongue is as sharp as a wasp. If the young lady will deign to forgive me Ive brought the medicine and a little food. Will the young lady accept it or will she send the old boor Yarpen Zigrin away?
Im sorry… Ciri had second thoughts and lowered her head. Triss really does need help Master… Zigrin. Shes very sick. Thank you for the medicine.
Its nothing. The dwarf bared his teeth again and patted her shoulder amicably. Come on Ciri you help me. The medicine has to be prepared. Well roll some pellets according to my grandmothers recipe. No disease sitting in the guts will resist these kernels.
He unwrapped the bundle extracted something shaped like a piece of turf and a small clay vessel. Ciri approached curious.
You should know Ciri said Yarpen that my grandmother knew her medicine like nobodys business. Unfortunately she believed that the source of most disease is idleness and idleness is best cured through the application of a stick. As far as my siblings and I were concerned she chiefly used this cure preventively. She beat us for anything and for nothing. She was a rare old hag. And once when out of the blue she gave me a chunk of bread with dripping and sugar it was such a surprise that I dropped it in astonishment dripping down. So my gran gave me a thrashing the nasty old bitch. And then she gave me another chunk of bread only without the sugar.
My grandmother Ciri nodded in understanding thrashed me once too. With a switch.
A switch? The dwarf laughed. Mine whacked me once with a pickaxe handle. But thats enough reminiscing we have to roll the pellets. Here tear this up and mould it into little balls.
What is it? Its sticky and messy… Eeeuuggh… What a stink!
Its mouldy oil-meal bread. Excellent medicine. Roll it into little balls. Smaller smaller theyre for a magician not a cow. Give me one. Good. Now were going to roll the ball in medicine.
Eeeeuuuugggghh!
Stinks? The dwarf brought his upturned nose closer to the clay pot. Impossible. Crushed garlic and bitter salt has no right to stink even if its a hundred years old.
Its foul uugghh. Triss wont eat that!
Well use my grandmothers method. You squeeze her nose and Ill shove the pellets in.
Yarpen Geralt hissed emerging abruptly from the darkness with the magician in his arms. Watch out or Ill shove something down you.
Its medicine! The dwarf took offence. It helps! Mould garlic…
Yes moaned Triss weakly from the depths of her cocoon. Its true… Geralt it really ought to help…
See? Yarpen nudged Geralt with his elbow turning his beard up proudly and pointing to Triss who swallowed the pellets with a martyred expression. A wise magician. Knows whats good for her.
What are you saying Triss? The witcher leaned over. Ah I see. Yarpen do you have any angelica? Or saffron?
Ill have a look and ask around. Ive brought you some water and a little food—
Thank you. But they both need rest above all. Ciri lie down.
Ill just make up a compress for Triss—
Ill do it myself. Yarpen Id like to talk to you.
Come to the fire. Well broach a barrel—
I want to talk to you. I dont need an audience. Quite the contrary.
Of course. Im listening.
What sort of convoy is this?
The dwarf raised his small piercing eyes at him.
The kings service he said slowly and emphatically.
Thats what I thought. The witcher held the gaze. Yarpen Im not asking out of any inappropriate curiosity.
I know. And I also know what you mean. But this convoy is… hmm… special.
So what are you transporting?
Salt fish said Yarpen casually and proceeded to embellish his lie without batting an eyelid. Fodder tools harnesses various odds and ends for the army. Wenck is a quartermaster to the kings army.
If hes quartermaster then Im a druid smiled Geralt. But thats your affair – Im not in the habit of poking my nose into other peoples secrets. But you can see the state Triss is in. Let us join you Yarpen let us put her in one of the wagons. Just for a few days. Im not asking where youre going because this trail goes straight to the south without forking until past the Lixela and its a ten-day journey to the Lixela. By that time the fever will have subsided and Triss will be able to ride a horse. And even if she isnt then Ill stop in a town beyond the river. Ten days in a wagon well covered hot food… Please.
I dont give the orders here. Wenck does.
I dont believe you lack influence over him. Not in a convoy primarily made up of dwarves. Of course he has to bear you in mind.
Who is this Triss to you?
What difference does it make in this situation?
In this situation – none. I asked out of an inappropriate curiosity born of the desire to start new rumours going around the inns. But be that as it may youre mighty attracted to this enchantress Geralt.
The witcher smiled sadly.
And the girl? Yarpen indicated Ciri with his head as she wriggled under the sheepskin. Yours?
Mine he replied without thinking. Mine Zigrin.
The dawn was grey wet and smelled of night rain and morning mist. Ciri felt she had slept no more than a few minutes as though she had been woken up the very minute she laid her head down on the sacks heaped on the wagon.
Geralt was just settling Triss down next to her having brought her in from another enforced expedition into the woods. The rugs cocooning the enchantress sparkled with dew. Geralt had dark circles under his eyes. Ciri knew he had not closed them for an instant – Triss had run a fever through the night and suffered greatly.
Did I wake you? Sorry. Sleep Ciri. Its still early.
Whats happening with Triss? How is she?
Better moaned the magician. Better but… Listen Geralt… Id like to—
Yes? The witcher leaned over but Triss was already asleep. He straightened himself stretched.
Geralt whispered Ciri are they going to let us travel on the wagon?
Well see. He bit his lip. Sleep while you can. Rest.
He jumped down off the wagon. Ciri heard the sound of the camp packing up – horses stamping harnesses ringing poles squeaking swingle-trees grating and talking and cursing. And then nearby Yarpen Zigrins hoarse voice and the calm voice of the tall man called Wenck. And the cold voice of Geralt. She raised herself and carefully peered out from behind the canvas.
I have no categorical interdictions on this matter declared Wenck.
Excellent. The dwarf brightened. So the matters settled?
The commissar raised his hand a little indicating that he had not yet finished. He was silent for a while and Geralt and Yarpin waited patiently.
Nevertheless Wenck said finally when it comes to the safe arrival of this caravan its my head on the line.
Again he said nothing. This time no one interrupted. There was no question about it – one had to get used to long intervals between sentences when speaking to the commissar.
For its safe arrival he continued after a moment. And for its timely arrival. Caring for this sick woman might slow down the march.
Were ahead of schedule on the route Yarpen assured him after a significant pause. Were ahead of time Wenck sir we wont miss the deadline. And as for safety… I dont think the witchers company will harm that. The Trail leads through the woods right up to the Lixela and to the right and left theres a wild forest. And rumour has it all sorts of evil creatures roam the forest.
Indeed the commissar agreed. Looking the witcher straight in the eye he seemed to be weighing out every single word. One can come across certain evil creatures in Kaedwen forests lately incited by other evil creatures. They could jeopardise our safety. King Henselt knowing this empowered me to recruit volunteers to join our armed escort. Geralt? That would solve your problem.
The witchers silence lasted a long while longer than Wencks entire speech interspersed though it had been with regular pauses.
No he said finally. No Wenck. Let us put this clearly. I am prepared to repay the help given Lady Merigold but not in this manner. I can groom the horses carry water and firewood even cook. But I will not enter the kings service as a soldier. Please dont count on my sword. I have no intention of killing those as you call them evil creatures on the order of other creatures whom I do not consider to be any better.
Ciri heard Yarpen Zigrin hiss loudly and cough into his rolled-up sleeve. Wenck stared at the witcher calmly.
I see he stated dryly. I like clear situations. All right then. Zigrin see to it that the speed of our progress does not slow. As for you Geralt… I know you will prove to be useful and helpful in a way you deem fit. It would be an affront to both of us if I were to treat your good stead as payment for aid offered to a suffering woman. Is she feeling better today?
The witcher gave a nod which seemed to Ciri to be somewhat deeper and politer than usual. Wencks expression did not change.
That pleases me he said after a normal pause. In taking Lady Merigold aboard a wagon in my convoy I take on the responsibility for her health comfort and safety. Zigrin give the command to march out.
Wenck.
Yes Geralt?
Thank you.
The commissar bowed his head a bit more deeply and politely it seemed to Ciri than the usual perfunctory politeness required.
Yarpen Zigrin ran the length of the column giving orders and instructions loudly after which he clambered onto the coachmans box shouted and whipped the horses with the reins. The wagon jolted and rattled along the forest trail. The bump woke Triss up but Ciri reassured her and changed the compress on her forehead. The rattling had a soporific effect and the magician was soon asleep; Ciri too fell to dozing.
When she woke the sun was already high. She peered out between the barrels and packages. The wagon she was in was at the vanguard of the convoy. The one following them was being driven by a dwarf with a red kerchief tied around his neck. From conversations between the dwarves she had gathered that his name was Paulie Dahlberg. Next to him sat his brother Regan. She also saw Wenck riding a horse in the company of two bailiffs.
Roach Geralts mare tethered to the wagon greeted her with a quiet neigh. She couldnt see her chestnut anywhere or Trisss dun. No doubt they were at the rear with the convoys spare horses.
Geralt was sitting on the coachmans box next to Yarpen. They were talking quietly drinking beer from a barrel perched between them. Ciri pricked up her ears but soon grew bored – the discussion concerned politics and was mainly about King Henselts intentions and plans and some special service or missions to do with secretly aiding his neighbour King Demawend of Aedirn who was being threatened by war. Geralt expressed interest about how five wagons of salted fish could help Aedirns defence. Yarpen ignoring the gibe in Geralts voice explained that some species of fish were so valuable that a few wagon-loads would suffice to pay an armoured company for a year and each new armoured company was a considerable help. Geralt was surprised that the aid had to be quite so secretive to which the dwarf replied that was why the secret was a secret.
Triss tossed in her sleep shook the compress off and talked indistinctly to herself. She demanded that someone called Kevyn kept his hands to himself and immediately after that declared that destiny cannot be avoided. Finally having stated that everyone absolutely everyone is a mutant to a certain degree she fell into a peaceful sleep.
Ciri also felt sleepy but was brought to her senses by Yarpens chuckle as he reminded Geralt of their past adventures. This one concerned a hunt for a golden dragon who instead of allowing itself to be hunted down had counted the hunters bones and then eaten a cobbler called Goatmuncher. Ciri began to listen with greater interest.
Geralt asked about what had happened to the Slashers but Yarpen didnt know. Yarpen in turn was curious about a woman called Yennefer at which Geralt grew oddly uncommunicative. The dwarf drank more beer and started to complain that Yennefer still bore him a grudge although a good few years had gone by since those days.
I came across her at the market in Gors Velen he recounted. She barely noticed me – she spat like a she-cat and insulted my deceased mother horribly. I fled for all I was worth but she shouted after me that shed catch up with me one day and make grass grow out of my arse.
Ciri giggled imagining Yarpen with the grass. Geralt grunted something about women and their impulsive natures – which the dwarf considered far too mild a description for maliciousness obstinacy and vindictiveness. Geralt did not take up the subject and Ciri fell into dozing once more.
This time she was woken by raised voices. Yarpens voice to be exact – he was yelling.
Oh yes! So you know! Thats what Ive decided!
Quieter said the witcher calmly. Theres a sick woman in the wagon. Understand Im not criticising your decisions or your resolutions…
No of course not the dwarf interrupted sarcastically. Youre just smiling knowingly about them.
Yarpen Im warning you as one friend to another: both sides despise those who sit on the fence or at best they treat them with suspicion.
Im not sitting. Im unambiguously declaring myself to be on one side.
But youll always remain a dwarf for that side. Someone whos different. An outsider. While for the other side…
He broke off.
Well! growled Yarpen turning away. Well go on what are you waiting for? Call me a traitor and a dog on a human leash who for a handful of silver and a bowl of lousy food is prepared to be set against his rebelling kinsmen who are fighting for freedom. Well go on spit it out. I dont like insinuations.
No Yarpen said Geralt quietly. No. Im not going to spit anything out.
Ah youre not? The dwarf whipped the horses. You dont feel like it? You prefer to stare and smile? Not a word to me eh? But you could say it to Wenck! Please dont count on my sword. Oh so haughtily nobly and proudly said! Shove your haughtiness up a dogs arse and your bloody pride with it!
I just wanted to be honest. I dont want to get mixed up in this conflict. I want to remain neutral.
Its impossible! yelled Yarpen. Its impossible to remain neutral dont you understand that? No you dont understand anything. Oh get off my wagon get on your horse and get out of my sight with your arrogant neutrality. You get on my nerves.
Geralt turned away. Ciri held her breath in anticipation. But the witcher didnt say a word. He stood and jumped from the wagon swiftly softly and nimbly. Yarpen waited for him to untether his mare from the ladder then whipped his horses once again growling something incomprehensible sounding terrifying under his breath.
She stood up to jump down too and find her chestnut. The dwarf turned and measured her with a reluctant eye.
And youre just a nuisance too little madam he snorted angrily. All we need are ladies and girls damn it. I cant even take a piss from the box – I have to stop the cart and go into the bushes!
Ciri put her hands on her hips shook her ashen fringe and turned up her nose.
Is that so? she shrilled enraged. Drink less beer Zigrin and then you wont have to!
My beers none of your shitin business you chit!
Dont yell Triss has just fallen asleep!
Its my wagon! Ill yell if I want to!
Stumpy!
What? You impertinent brat!
Stump!
Ill show you stump… Oh damn it! Pprrr!
The dwarf leaned far back pulling at the reins at the very last moment just as the two horses were on the point of stepping over a log blocking their way. Yarpen stood up in the box and swearing in both human and dwarvish whistling and roaring brought the cart to a halt. Dwarves and humans alike leaping from their wagons ran up and helped lead the horses to the clear path tugging them on by their halters and harnesses.
Dozing off eh Yarpen? growled Paulie Dahlberg as he approached. Bloody hell if youd ridden over that the axle would be done for and the wheels shattered to hell. Damn it what were you—
Piss off Paulie! roared Yarpen Zigrin and furiously lashed the horses hindquarters with the reins.
You were lucky said Ciri ever so sweetly squeezing onto the box next to the dwarf. As you can see its better to have a witcher-girl on your wagon than to travel alone. I warned you just in time. But if youd been in the middle of pissing from the box and ridden onto that log well well. Its scary to think what might have happened—
Are you going to be quiet?
Im not saying any more. Not a word.
She lasted less than a minute.
Zigrin sir?
Im not a sir. The dwarf nudged her with his elbow and bared his teeth. Im Yarpen. Is that clear? Well lead the horses together right?
Right. Can I hold the reins?
If you must. Wait not like that. Pass them over your index finger and hold them down with your thumb like this. The same with the left. Dont tug them dont pull too hard.
Is that right?
Right.
Yarpen?
Huh?
What does it mean remain neutral
To be indifferent he muttered reluctantly. Dont let the reins hang down. Pull the left one closer to yourself!
Whats indifferent? Indifferent to what?
The dwarf leaned far out and spat under the wagon.
If the Scoiatael attack us your Geralt intends to stand by and look calmly on as they cut our throats. Youll probably stand next to him because itll be a demonstration class. Todays subject: the witchers behaviour in the face of conflict between intelligent races.
I dont understand.
That doesnt surprise me in the least.
Is that why you quarrelled with him and were angry? Who are these Scoiatael anyway? These… Squirrels?
Ciri Yarpen tussled his beard violently these arent matters for the minds of little girls.
Aha now youre angry at me. Im not little at all. I heard what the soldiers in the fort said about the Squirrels. I saw… I saw two dead elves. And the knight said they also kill. And that its not just elves amongst them. There are dwarves too.
I know said Yarpen sourly.
And youre a dwarf.
Theres no doubt about that.
So why are you afraid of the Squirrels? It seems they only fight humans.
Its not so simple as that. He grew solemn. Unfortunately.
Ciri stayed silent for a long time biting her lower lip and wrinkling her nose.
Now I know she said suddenly. The Squirrels are fighting for freedom. And although youre a dwarf youre King Henselts special secret servant on a human leash.
Yarpen snorted wiped his nose on his sleeve and leaned out of the box to check that Wenck had not ridden up too close. But the commissar was far away engaged in conversation with Geralt.
Youve got pretty good hearing girl like a marmot. He grinned broadly. Youre also a bit too bright for someone destined to give birth cook and spin. You think you know everything dont you? Thats because youre a brat. Dont pull silly faces. Faces like that dont make you look any older just uglier than usual. Youve grasped the nature of the Scoiataels quickly you like the slogans. You know why you understand them so well? Because the Scoiataels are brats too. Theyre little snotheads who dont understand that theyre being egged on that someones taking advantage of their childish stupidity by feeding them slogans about freedom.
But they really are fighting for freedom. Ciri raised her head and gazed at the dwarf with wide-open green eyes. Like the dryads in the Brokilon woods. They kill people because people… some people are harming them. Because this used to be your country the dwarves and the elves and those… halflings gnomes and other… And now there are people here so the elves—
Elves! snorted Yarpen. They – to be accurate – happen to be strangers just as much as you humans although they arrived in their white ships a good thousand years before you. Now theyre competing with each other to offer us friendship suddenly were all brothers now theyre grinning and saying: we kinsmen we the Elder Races. But before shi— Hm hm… Before their arrows used to whistle past our ears when we—
So the first on earth were dwarves?
Gnomes to be honest. As far as this part of the world is concerned – because the world is unimaginably huge Ciri.
I know. I saw a map—
You couldnt have. No ones drawn a map like that and I doubt they will in the near future. No one knows what exists beyond the Mountains of Fire and the Great Sea. Even elves although they claim they know everything. They know shit all I tell you.
Hmm… But now… There are far more people than… Than there are you.
Because you multiply like rabbits. The dwarf ground his teeth. Youd do nothing but screw day in day out without discrimination with just anyone and anywhere. And its enough for your women to just sit on a mans trousers and it makes their bellies swell… Why have you gone so red crimson as a poppy? You wanted to know didnt you? So youve got the honest truth and faithful history of a world where he who shatters the skulls of others most efficiently and swells womens bellies fastest reigns. And its just as hard to compete with you people in murdering as it is in screwing—
Yarpen said Geralt coldly riding up on Roach. Restrain yourself a little if you please with your choice of words. And Ciri stop playing at being a coachwoman and have a care for Triss check if shes awake and needs anything.
Ive been awake for a long time the magician said weakly from the depths of the wagon. But I didnt want to… interrupt this interesting conversation. Dont disturb them Geralt. Id like… to learn more about the role of screwing in the evolution of society.
Can I heat some water? Triss wants to wash.
Go ahead agreed Yarpen Zigrin. Xavier take the spit off the fire our hares had enough. Hand me the cauldron Ciri. Oh look at you its full to the brim! Did you lug this great weight from the stream by yourself?
Im strong.
The elder of the Dahlberg brothers burst out laughing.
Dont judge her by appearances Paulie said Yarpen seriously as he skilfully divided the roasted grey hare into portions. Theres nothing to laugh at here. Shes skinny but I can see shes a robust and resilient lass. Shes like a leather belt: thin but it cant be torn apart in your hands. And if you were to hang yourself on it it would bear your weight too.
No one laughed. Ciri squatted next to the dwarves sprawled around the fire. This time Yarpen Zigrin and his four boys had lit their own fire at the camp because they did not intend to share the hare which Xavier Moran had shot. For them alone there was just enough for one at most two mouthfuls each.
Add some wood to the fire said Yarpen licking his fingers. The water will heat quicker.
That waters a stupid idea stated Regan Dahlberg spitting out a bone. Washing can only harm you when youre sick. When youre healthy too come to that. You remember old Schrader? His wife once told him to wash and Schrader went and died soon afterwards.
Because a rabid dog bit him.
If he hadnt washed the dog wouldnt have bitten him.
I think said Ciri checking the temperature of the water in the cauldron with her finger its excessive to wash every day too. But Triss asked for it – she even started crying once… So Geralt and I—
We know. The elder Dahlberg nodded. But that a witcher should… Im constantly amazed. Hey Zigrin if you had a woman would you wash her and comb her hair? Would you carry her into the bushes if she had to—
Shut up Paulie. Yarpen cut him short. Dont say anything against that witcher because hes a good fellow.
Am I saying anything? Im only surprised—
Triss Ciri butted in cheekily is not his woman.
Im all the more surprised.
Youre all the more a blockhead you mean Yarpen summed up. Ciri pour a bit of water in to boil. Well infuse some more saffron and poppy seeds for the magician. She felt better today eh?
Probably did murmured Yannick Brass. We only had to stop the convoy six times for her. I know it wouldnt do to deny aid on the trail and hes a prick who thinks otherwise. And he who denies it would be an archprick and base son-of-a-bitch. But weve been in these woods too long far too long I tell you. Were tempting fate damn it were tempting fate too much boys. Its not safe here. The Scoiatael—
Spit that word out Yannick.
Ptoo ptoo. Yarpen fighting doesnt frighten me and a bit of bloods nothing new but… If it comes to fighting our own… Damn it! Why did this happen to us? This friggin load ought to be transported by a hundred friggin cavalrymen not us! The devil take those know-alls from Ard Carraigh may they—
Shut up I said. And pass me the pot of kasha. The hare was a snack damn it now we have to eat something. Ciri will you eat with us?
Of course.
For a long while all that could be heard was the smacking of lips munching and the crunch of wooden spoons hitting the pot.
Pox on it said Paulie Dahlberg and gave a long burp. I could still eat some more.
Me too declared Ciri and burped too delighted by the dwarves unpretentious manners.
As long as its not kasha said Xavier Moran. I cant stomach those milled oats any more. Ive gone off salted meat too.
So gorge yourself on grass if youve got such delicate taste-buds.
Or rip the bark off the birch with your teeth. Beavers do it and survive.
A beaver – now thats something I could eat.
As for me a fish. Paulie lost himself in dreams as he crunched on a husk pulled from his beard. Ive a fancy for a fish I can tell you.
So lets catch some fish.
Where? growled Yannick Brass. In the bushes?
In the stream.
Some stream. You can piss to the other side. What sort of fish could be in there?
There are fish. Ciri licked her spoon clean and slipped it into the top of her boot. I saw them when I went to get the water. But theyre sick or something those fish. Theyve got a rash. Black and red spots—
Trout! roared Paulie spitting crumbs of husk. Well boys to the stream double-quick! Regan! Get your breeches down! Well turn them into a fishing-trap.
Why mine?
Pull them off at the double or Ill wallop you snothead! Didnt mother say you have to listen to me?
Hurry up if you want to go fishing because dusk is just round the corner said Yarpen. Ciri is the water hot yet? Leave it leave it youll burn yourself and get dirty from the cauldron. I know youre strong but let me – Ill carry it.
Geralt was already waiting for them; they could see his white hair through the gap in the canvas covering the wagon from afar. The dwarf poured the water into the bucket.
Need any help witcher?
No thank you Yarpen. Ciri will help.
Triss was no longer running a high temperature but she was extremely weak. Geralt and Ciri were by now efficient at undressing and washing her. They had also learned to temper her ambitious but at present unrealistic attempts to manage on her own. They coped exceptionally well – he supported the enchantress in his arms Ciri washed and dried her. Only one thing had started to surprise and annoy Ciri – Triss in her opinion snuggled up to Geralt too tightly. This time she was even trying to kiss him.
Geralt indicated the magicians saddle-bags with his head. Ciri understood immediately because this too was part of the ritual – Triss always demanded to have her hair combed. She found the comb and knelt down beside her. Triss lowering her head towards her put her arms around the witcher. In Ciris opinion definitely a little too tightly.
Oh Geralt she sobbed. I so regret… I so regret that what was between us—
Triss please.
…it should have happened… now. When Im better… It would be entirely different… I could… I could even—
Triss.
I envy Yennefer… I envy her you—
Ciri step out.
But—
Go please.
She jumped out of the wagon and straight onto Yarpen who was waiting leaning against a wheel and pensively chewing a blade of grass. The dwarf put his arm around her. He did not need to lean over in order to do so as Geralt did. He was no taller than her.
Never make the same mistake little witcher-girl he murmured indicating the wagon with his eyes. If someone shows you compassion sympathy and dedication if they surprise you with integrity of character value it but dont mistake it for… something else.
Its not nice to eavesdrop.
I know. And its dangerous. I only just managed to jump aside when you threw out the suds from the bucket. Come on lets go and see how many trout have jumped into Regans breeches.
Yarpen?
Huh?
I like you.
And I like you kid.
But youre a dwarf. And Im not.
And what diff— Ah the Scoiatael. Youre thinking about the Squirrels arent you? Its not giving you any peace is it?
Ciri freed herself from his heavy arm.
Nor you she said. Nor any of the others. I can plainly see that.
The dwarf said nothing.
Yarpen?
Yes?
Whos right? The Squirrels or you? Geralt wants to be… neutral. You serve King Henselt even though youre a dwarf. And the knight in the fort shouted that everybodys our enemy and that everyones got to be… Everyone. Even the children. Why Yarpen? Whos right?
I dont know said the dwarf with some effort. Im not omniscient. Im doing what I think right. The Squirrels have taken up their weapons and gone into the woods. Humans to the sea theyre shouting not realising that their catchy slogan was fed them by Nilfgaardian emissaries. Not understanding that the slogan is not aimed at them but plainly at humans that its meant to ignite human hatred not fire young elves to battle. I understood – thats why I consider the Scoiataels actions criminally stupid. What to do? Maybe in a few years time Ill be called a traitor who sold out and theyll be heroes… Our history the history of our world has seen events turn out like that.
He fell silent ruffled his beard. Ciri also remained silent.
Elirena… he muttered suddenly. If Elirena was a hero if what she did is heroism then thats just too bad. Let them call me a traitor and a coward. Because I Yarpen Zigrin coward traitor and renegade state that we should not kill each other. I state that we ought to live. Live in such a way that we dont later have to ask anyone for forgiveness. The heroic Elirena… She had to ask. Forgive me she begged forgive me. To hell with that! Its better to die than to live in the knowledge that youve done something that needs forgiveness.
Again he fell quiet. Ciri did not ask the questions pressing to her lips. She instinctively felt she should not.
We have to live next to each other Yarpen continued. We and you humans. Because we simply dont have any other option. Weve known this for two hundred years and weve been working towards it for over a hundred. You want to know why I entered King Henselts service why I made such a decision? I cant allow all that work to go to waste. For over a hundred years weve been trying to come to terms with the humans. The halflings gnomes us even the elves – Im not talking about rusalkas nymphs and sylphs theyve always been savages even when you werent here. Damn it all it took a hundred years but somehow or other we managed to live a common life next to each other together. We managed to partially convince humans that were not so very different—
Were not different at all Yarpen.
The dwarf turned abruptly.
Were not different at all repeated Ciri. After all you think and feel like Geralt. And like… like I do. We eat the same things from the same pot. You help Triss and so do I. You had a grandmother and I had a grandmother… My grandmother was killed by the Nilfgaardians. In Cintra.
And mine by the humans the dwarf said with some effort. In Brugge. During the pogrom.
Riders! shouted one of Wencks advance guards. Riders ahead!
The commissar trotted up to Yarpens wagon and Geralt approached from the other side.
Get in the back Ciri he said brusquely. Get off the box and get in the back! Stay with Triss.
I cant see anything from there!
Dont argue! growled Yarpen. Scuttle back there and be quick about it! And hand me the martel. Its under the sheepskin.
This? Ciri held up a heavy nasty-looking object like a hammer with a sharp slightly curved hook at its head.
Thats it confirmed the dwarf. He slipped the handle into the top of his boot and laid the axe on his knees. Wenck seeming calm watched the highway while sheltering his eyes with his hand.
Light cavalry from Ban Gleán he surmised after a while. The so-called Dun Banner – I recognise them by their cloaks and beaver hats. Remain calm. And stay sharp. Cloaks and beaver hats can be pretty quick to change owners.
The riders approached swiftly. There were about ten of them. Ciri saw Paulie Dahlberg in the wagon behind her place two readied crossbows on his knee and Regan covered them with a cloak. Ciri crept stealthily out from under the canvas hiding behind Yarpens broad back. Triss tried to raise herself swore and collapsed against her bedding.
Halt! shouted the first of the riders no doubt their leader. Who are you? From whence and to where do you ride?
Who asks? Wenck calmly pulled himself upright in the saddle. And on whose authority?
King Henselts army inquisitive sir! Lance-corporal Zyvik asks and he is unused to asking twice! So answer at the double! Who are you?
Quartermasters service of the Kings army.
Anyone could claim that! I see no one here bearing the Kings colours!
Come closer lance-corporal and examine this ring.
Why flash a ring at me? The soldier grimaced. Am I supposed to know every ring or something? Anyone could have a ring like that. Some significant sign!
Yarpen Zigrin stood up in the box raised his axe and with a swift move pushed it under the soldiers nose.
And this sign he snarled. You know it? Smell it and remember how it smells.
The lance-corporal yanked the reins and turned his horse.
Threaten me do you? he roared. Me? Im in the kings service!
And so are we said Wenck quietly. And have been for longer than you at that Im sure. I warn you trooper dont overdo it.
Im on guard here! How am I to know who you are?
You saw the ring drawled the commissar. And if you didnt recognise the sign on the jewel then I wonder who you are. The colours of your unit bear the same emblem so you ought to know it.
The soldier clearly restrained himself influenced no doubt equally by Wencks calm words and the serious determined faces peering from the escorts carts.
Hmm… he said shifting his fur-hat towards his left ear. Fine. But if you truly are who you claim to be you will not I trust have anything against my having a look to see what you carry in the wagons.
We will indeed. Wenck frowned. And very much at that. Our load is not your business lance-corporal. Besides I do not understand what you think you may find there.
You do not understand. The soldier nodded lowering his hand towards the hilt of his sword. So I shall tell you sir. Human trafficking is forbidden and there is no lack of scoundrels selling slaves to the Nilfgaardians. If I find humans in stocks in your wagons you will not convince me that you are in the kings service. Even if you were to show me a dozen rings.
Fine said Wenck dryly. If it is slaves you are looking for then look. You have my permission.
The soldier cantered to the wagon in the middle leaned over from the saddle and raised the canvas.
Whats in those barrels?
What do you expect? Prisoners? sneered Yannick Brass sprawled in the coachmans box.
I am asking you whats in them so answer me!
Salt fish.
And in those trunks there? The warrior rode up to the next wagon and kicked the side.
Hooves snapped Paulie Dahlberg. And there in the back are buffalo skins.
So I see. The lance-corporal waved his hand smacked his lips at his horse rode up to the vanguard and peered into Yarpens wagon.
And who is that woman lying there?
Triss Merigold smiled weakly raised herself to her elbow and traced a short complicated sign with her hand.
Who am I? she asked in a quiet voice. But you cant see me at all.
The soldier winked nervously shuddered slightly.
Salt fish he said convinced lowering the canvas. All is in order. And this child?
Dried mushrooms said Ciri looking at him impudently. The soldier fell silent frozen with his mouth open.
Whats that? he asked after a while frowning. What?
Have you concluded your inspection warrior? Wenck showed cool interest as he rode up on the other side of the cart. The soldier could barely look away from Ciris green eyes.
I have concluded it. Drive on and may the gods guide you. But be on your guard. Two days ago the Scoiatael wiped out an entire mounted patrol up by Badger Ravine. It was a strong large command. Its true that Badger Ravine is far from here but elves travel through the forest faster than the wind. We were ordered to round them up but how do you catch an elf? Its like trying to catch the wind—
Good enough were not interested the commissar interrupted him brusquely. Time presses and we still have a long journey ahead of us.
Fare you well then. Hey follow me!
You heard Geralt? snarled Yarpen Zigrin watching the patrol ride away. There are bloody Squirrels in the vicinity. I felt it. Ive got this tingling feeling in my back all the time as if some archer was already aiming at me. No damn it we cant travel blindly as weve been doing until now whistling away dozing and sleepily farting. We have to know what lies ahead of us. Listen Ive an idea.
Ciri pulled her chestnut up sharply and then launched into a gallop leaning low in the saddle. Geralt engrossed in conversation with Wenck suddenly sat up straight.
Dont run wild! he called. No madness girl! Do you want to break your neck? And dont go too far—
She heard no more – she had torn ahead too fiercely. She had done it on purpose not wanting to listen to the daily cautions. Not too quickly not too fiercely Ciri! Pah-pah. Dont go too far! Pah-pah-pah. Be careful! Pah-pah!Exactly as if I were a child she thought. And Im almost thirteen and have a swift chestnut beneath me and a sharp sword across my back. And Im not afraid of anything!
And its spring!
Hey careful youll burn your backside!
Yarpen Zigrin. Another know-it-all. Pah-pah!
Further further at a gallop along the bumpy path through the green green grasses and bushes through the silver puddles through the damp golden sand through the feathery ferns. A frightened fallow deer disappeared into the woods flashing the black and white lantern of its tail and rump as it skipped away. Birds soared up from the trees – colourful jays and bee-eaters screaming black magpies with their funny tails. Water splashed beneath her horses hooves in the puddles and the clefts.
Further even further! The horse which had been trudging sluggishly behind the wagon for too long carried her joyously and briskly; happy to be allowed speed it ran fluidly muscles playing between her thighs damp mane thrashing her face. The horse extended its neck as Ciri gave it free rein. Further dear horse dont feel the bit further at the gallop at the gallop sharp sharp! Spring!
She slowed and glanced back. There alone at last. Far away at last. No one was going to tell her off any more remind her of something demand her attention threaten that this would be the end of such rides. Alone at last free at ease and independent.
Slower. A light trot. After all this wasnt just a fun ride she also had responsibilities. Ciri was after all a mounted foray now a patrol an advance guard. Ha she thought looking around the safety of the entire convoy depends on me now. Theyre all waiting impatiently for me to return and report: the way is clear and passable I didnt see anyone – there are no traces of wheels or hooves. Ill report it and thin Master Wenck with his cold blue eyes will nod his head gravely Yarpen Zigrin will bare his yellow horse teeth Paulie Dahlberg will shout: Well done little one! and Geralt will smile faintly. Hell smile although he very rarely smiles recently.
Ciri looked around and took a mental note. Two felled birches – no problem. A heap of branches – nothing the wagons couldnt pass. A cleft washed out by the rain – a small obstacle the wheels of the first wagon will run over it the others will follow in the ruts. A huge clearing – a good place for a rest…
Traces? What traces can there be here? Theres no one here. Theres the forest. There are birds screeching amidst fresh green leaves. A red fox runs leisurely across the path… And everything smells of spring.
The track broke off halfway up the hill disappeared in the sandy ravine wound through the crooked pines which clung to the slopes. Ciri abandoned the path and wanting to scrutinise the area from a height climbed the steep slope. And so she could touch the wet sweet-smelling leaves…
She dismounted threw the reins over a snag in a tree and slowly strolled among the junipers which covered the hill. On the other side of the hill was an open space gaping in the thick of the forest like a hole bitten out of the trees – left no doubt after a fire which had raged here a very long time ago for there was no sign of blackened or charred remains everywhere was green with low birches and little fir trees. The trail as far as the eye could see seemed clear and passable.
And safe.
What are they afraid of? she thought. The Scoiatael? But what was there to be afraid of? Im not frightened of elves. I havent done anything to them.
Elves. The Squirrels. Scoiatael.
Before Geralt had ordered her to leave Ciri had managed to take a look at the corpses in the fort. She remembered one in particular – his face covered by hair stuck together with darkened blood his neck unnaturally twisted and bent. Pulled back in a ghastly set grimace his upper lip revealed teeth very white and very tiny non-human. She remembered the elfs boots ruined and reaching up to the knees laced at the bottom and fastened at the top with many wrought buckles.
Elves who kill humans and die in battles themselves. Geralt says you have to remain neutral… And Yarpen says you have to behave in such a way that you dont have to ask for forgiveness…
She kicked a molehill and lost in thought dug her heel into the sand.
Who and whom whom and what should one forgive?
The Squirrels kill humans. And Nilfgaard pays them for it. Uses them. Incites them. Nilfgaard.
Ciri had not forgotten – although she very much wanted to forget – what had happened in Cintra. The wandering the despair the fear the hunger and the pain. The apathy and torpor which came later much later when the druids from Transriver had found her and taken her in. She remembered it all as though through a mist and she wanted to stop remembering it.
But it came back. Came back in her thoughts into her dreams. Cintra. The thundering of horses and the savage cries corpses flames… And the black knight in his winged helmet… And later… Cottages in Transriver… A flame-blackened chimney amongst charred ruins… Next to it by an unscathed well a black cat licking a terrible burn on its side. A well… A sweep… A bucket…
A bucket full of blood.
Ciri wiped her face looked down at her hand taken aback. Her palm was wet. The girl sniffed and wiped the tears with her sleeve.
Neutrality? Indifference? She wanted to scream. A witcher looking on indifferently? No! A witcher has to defend people. From the leshy the vampire the werewolf. And not only from them. He has to defend people from every evil. And in Transriver I saw what evil is.
A witcher has to defend and save. To defend men so that they arent hung on trees by their hands arent impaled and left to die. To defend fair girls from being spread-eagled between stakes rammed into the ground. Defend children so they arent slaughtered and thrown into a well. Even a cat burned alive in a torched barn deserves to be defended. Thats why Im going to become a witcher thats why Ive got a sword to defend people like those in Sodden and Transriver – because they dont have swords dont know the steps half-turns dodges and pirouettes. No one has taught them how to fight they are defenceless and helpless in face of the werewolf and the Nilfgaardian marauder. Theyre teaching me to fight so that I can defend the helpless. And thats what Im going to do. Never will I be neutral. Never will I be indifferent.
Never!
She didnt know what warned her – whether it was the sudden silence which fell over the forest like a cold shadow or a movement caught out of the corner of her eye. But she reacted in a flash instinctively – with a reaction she had learnt in the woods of Transriver when escaping from Cintra she had raced against death. She fell to the ground crawled under a juniper bush and froze motionless. Just let the horse not neigh she thought.
On the other side of the ravine something moved again; she saw a silhouette show faintly hazily amidst the leaves. An elf peered cautiously from the thicket. Having thrown the hood from his head he looked around for a moment pricked up his ears and then noiselessly and swiftly moved along the ridge. After him two more leaned out. And then others moved. Many of them. In single file. About half were on horseback – these rode slowly straight in their saddles focused and alert. For a moment she saw them all clearly and precisely as in utter silence they flowed across a bright breach in the wall of trees framed against the background of the sky – before they disappeared dissolved in the shimmering shadows of the wild forest. They vanished without a rustle or a sound like ghosts. No horse tapped its hoof or snorted no branch cracked under foot or hoof. The weapons slung across them did not clang.
They disappeared but Ciri did not move. She lay flat on the ground under the juniper bush trying to breathe as quietly as possible. She knew that a frightened bird or animal could give her away and a bird or animal could be frightened by any sound or movement – even the slightest the most careful. She got up only when the woods had grown perfectly calm and the magpies chattered again among the trees where the elves had disappeared.
She rose only to find herself in a strong grip. A black leather glove fell across her mouth muffled the scream of fear.
Be quiet.
Geralt?
Quiet I said.
You saw them?
I did.
Its them… she whispered. The Scoiatael. Isnt it?
Yes. Quick back to the horses. Watch your feet.
They rode carefully and silently down the slope without returning to the trail; they remained in the thicket. Geralt looked around alert. He did not allow her to ride independently; he did not give her the chestnuts reins; he led the horse himself.
Ciri he said suddenly. Not a word about what we saw. Not to Yarpen not to Wenck. Not to anybody. Understand?
No she grunted lowering her head. I dont understand. Why shouldnt I say anything? They have to be warned. Whose side are we on Geralt? Whose side are we against? Whos our friend and whos our enemy?
Well part with the convoy tomorrow he said after a moments silence. Triss is almost recovered. Well say goodbye and go our own way. We have problems of our own our own worries and our own difficulties. Then I hope youll finally stop dividing the inhabitants of this world into friends and enemies.
Were to be… neutral? Indifferent is that right? And if they attack…
They wont.
And if—
Listen to me. He turned to her. Why do you think that such a vital load of gold and silver King Henselts secret aid for Aedirn is being escorted by dwarves and not humans? I saw an elf watching us from a tree yesterday. I heard them pass by our camp during the night. The Scoiatael will not attack the dwarves Ciri.
But theyre here she muttered. They are. Theyre moving around surrounding us…
I know why theyre here. Ill show you.
He turned the horse abruptly and threw the reins to her. She kicked the chestnut with her heels and moved away faster but he motioned for her to stay behind him. They cut across the trail and reentered the wild forest. The witcher led Ciri following in his tracks. Neither said anything. Not for a long time.
Look. Geralt held back his horse. Look Ciri.
What is it? she sighed.
Shaerrawedd.
In front of them as far as the woods allowed them to see rose smoothly hewn blocks of granite and marble with blunt corners worn away by the winds decorated with patterns long leached out by the rains cracked and shattered by frost split by tree roots. Amongst the trunks broken columns flashed white arcades the remains of ornamental friezes entwined with ivy and wrapped in a thick layer of green moss.
This was… a castle?
A palace. The elves didnt build castles. Dismount the horses wont manage in the rubble.
Who destroyed it all? Humans?
No they did. Before they left.
Why?
They knew they wouldnt be coming back. It happened following their second clash with the humans more than two hundred years ago. Before that they used to leave towns untouched when they retreated. Humans used to build on the foundations left by the elves. Thats how Novigrad Oxenfurt Wyzima Tretogor Maribor and Cidaris were built. And Cintra.
Cintra?
He confirmed it with a nod of the head not taking his eyes off the ruins.
They left whispered Ciri but now theyre coming back. Why?
To have a look.
At what?
Without a word he laid his hand on her shoulder and pushed her gently before him. They jumped down the marble stairs climbing down holding on to the springy hazel clusters of which had burst through every gap every crevice in the moss-covered cracked plates.
This was the centre of the palace its heart. A fountain.
Here? she asked surprised gazing at the dense thicket of alders and white birch trunks amongst the misshapen blocks and slabs. Here? But theres nothing there.
Come.
The stream feeding the fountain must have changed its course many times patiently and constantly washing the marble blocks and alabaster plates which had sunk or fallen to form dams once again changing the course of the current. As a result the whole area was divided up by shallow gullies. Here and there the water cascaded over the remains of the building washing it clean of leaves sand and litter. In these places the marble terracotta and mosaics were still as vibrant with colour as fresh as if they had been lying there for three days not two centuries.
Geralt leapt across the stream and went in amongst what remained of the columns. Ciri followed. They jumped off the ruined stairs and lowering their heads walked beneath the untouched arch of the arcade half buried beneath a mound of earth. The witcher stopped and indicated with his hand. Ciri sighed loudly.
From rubble colourful with smashed terracotta grew an enormous rose bush covered with beautiful white-lilied flowers. Drops of dew as bright as silver glistened on the petals. The bush wove its shoots around a large slab of white stone and from it a sad pretty face looked out at them; the downpours and snows had not yet managed to blur or wash away its delicate and noble features. It was a face which the chisels of plunderers digging out golden ornaments mosaics and precious stones from the relief sculpture had not managed to disfigure.
Aelirenn said Geralt after a long silence.
Shes beautiful whispered Ciri grabbing him by the hand. The witcher didnt seem to notice. He stared at the sculpture and was far away far away in a different world and time.
Aelirenn he repeated after a while. Known as Elirena by dwarves and humans. She led them into battle two hundred years ago. The elders of the elves were against it they knew they had no chance. That they would not be able to pick themselves up after the defeat. They wanted to save their people wanted to survive. They decided to destroy their towns and retreat to the inaccessible wild mountains… and to wait. Elves live a long time Ciri. By our time scale they are almost eternal. They thought humans were something that would pass like a drought like a heavy winter or a plague of locust after which comes rain spring a new harvest. They wanted to sit it out. Survive. They decided to destroy their towns and palaces amongst them their pride – the beautiful Shaerrawedd. They wanted to weather out the storm but Elirena… Elirena stirred up the young. They took up arms and followed her into their last desperate battle. And they were massacred. Mercilessly massacred.
Ciri did not say anything staring at the beautiful still face.
They died with her name on their lips the witcher continued quietly. Repeating her challenge her cry they died for Shaerrawedd. Because Shaerrawedd was a symbol. They died for this stone and marble… and for Aelirenn. Just as she promised them they died with dignity heroically and honourably. They saved their honour but they brought nothing but ruin as a result condemned their own race to annihilation. Their own people. You remember what Yarpen told you? Those who rule the world and those who die out? He explained it to you coarsely but truly. Elves live for a long time but only their youngsters are fertile only the young can have offspring. And practically all the elven youngsters had followed Elirena. They followed Aelirenn the White Rose of Shaerrawedd. We are standing in the ruins of her palace by the fountain whose waters she listened to in the evenings. And these… these were her flowers.
Ciri was silent. Geralt drew her to himself put his arm around her.
Do you know now why the Scoiatael were here do you see what they wanted to look at? And do you understand why the elven and dwarven young must not be allowed to be massacred once again? Do you understand why neither you nor I are permitted to have a hand in this massacre? These roses flower all year round. They ought to have grown wild by now but they are more beautiful than any rose in a tended garden. Elves continue to come to Shaerrawedd Ciri. A variety of elves. The impetuous and the foolish ones for whom the cracked stone is a symbol as well as the sensible ones for whom these immortal forever reborn flowers are a symbol. Elves who understand that if this bush is torn from the ground and the earth burned out the roses of Shaerrawedd will never flower again. Do you understand?
She nodded.
Do you understand what this neutrality is which stirs you so? To be neutral does not mean to be indifferent or insensitive. You dont have to kill your feelings. Its enough to kill hatred within yourself. Do you understand?
Yes she whispered. I understand. Geralt I… Id like to take one… One of these roses. To remind me. May I?
Do he said after some hesitation. Do in order to remember. Lets go now. Lets return to the convoy.
Ciri pinned the rose under the lacing of her jerkin. Suddenly she cried out quietly lifted her hand. A trickle of blood ran from her finger down her palm.
Did you prick yourself?
Yarpen… whispered the girl looking at the blood filling her life-line. Wenck… Paulie…
What?
Triss! she shouted with a piercing voice which was not hers shuddered fiercely and wiped her face with her arm. Quick Geralt! Weve got to help! To the horses Geralt!
Ciri! Whats happening?
Theyre dying!
She galloped with her ear almost touching the horses neck and spurred her mount on kicking with her heels and shouting. The sand of the forest path flew beneath the hooves. She heard screaming in the distance and smelt smoke.
Coming straight at them blocking the path raced two horses dragging a harness reins and a broken shaft behind them. Ciri did not hold her chestnut back and shot past them at full speed flakes of froth skimming across her face. Behind her she heard Roach neigh and Geralts curses as he was forced to a halt.
She tore around a bend in the path in to a large glade.
The convoy was in flames. From thickets flaming arrows flew towards the wagons like fire birds perforating the canvas and digging into the boards. The Scoiatael attacked with war-cries and yells.
Ciri ignoring Geralts shouts from behind her directed her horse straight at the first two wagons brought to the fore. One was lying on its side and Yarpen Zigrin axe in one hand crossbow in the other stood next to it. At his feet motionless with her blue dress hitched halfway up her thighs lay…
Triiiiiisss! Ciri straightened in the saddle thumping her horse with her heels. The Scoiatael turned towards her and arrows whistled past the girls ears. She shook her head without slowing her gallop. She heard Geralt shout ordering her to flee into the woods. She did not intend to obey. She leaned down and bolted straight towards the archers shooting at her. Suddenly she smelt the overpowering scent of the white rose pinned to her jerkin.
Triiiiisss!
The elves leaped out of the way of the speeding horses. Ciri caught one lightly with her stirrup. She heard a sharp buzz her steed struggled whinnied and threw itself to the side. Ciri saw an arrow dug deep just below the withers right by her thigh. She tore her feet from the stirrups jumped up squatted in the saddle bounced off strongly and leaped.
She fell softly on the body of the overturned wagon used her hands to balance herself and jumped again landing with bent knees next to Yarpen who was roaring and brandishing his axe. Next to them on the second wagon Paulie Dahlberg was fighting while Regan leaning back and bracing his legs against the board was struggling to hold on to the harnessed horses. They neighed wildly stamped their hooves and yanked at the shaft in fear of the fire devouring the canvas.
She rushed to Triss who lay amongst the scattered barrels and chests grabbed her by her clothes and started to drag her towards the overturned wagon. The enchantress moaned holding her head just above the ear. Right by Ciris side hooves suddenly clattered and horses snorted – two elves brandishing their swords were pressing the madly fighting Yarpen hard. The dwarf spun like a top and agilely deflected the blows directed against him with his axe. Ciri heard curses grunts and the whining clang of metal.
Another span of horses detached itself from the flaming convoy and rushed towards them dragging smoke and flames behind it and scattering burning rags. The wagonman hung inertly from the box and Yannick Brass stood next to him barely keeping his balance. With one hand he wielded the reins with the other he was cutting himself away from two elves galloping one at each side of the wagon. A third Scoiatael keeping up with the harnessed horses was shooting arrow after arrow into their sides.
Jump! yelled Yarpen shouting over the noise. Jump Yannick!
Ciri saw Geralt catch up with the speeding wagon and with a short spare slash of his sword swipe one of the elves from his saddle while Wenck riding up on the opposite side hewed at the other the elf shooting the horses. Yannick threw the reins down and jumped off – straight under the third Scoiataels horse. The elf stood in his stirrups and slashed at him with his sword. The dwarf fell. At that moment the flaming wagon crashed into those still fighting parting and scattering them. Ciri barely managed to pull Triss out from beneath the crazed horses hooves at the last moment. The swingle-tree tore away with a crack the wagon leaped into the air lost a wheel and overturned scattering its load and smouldering boards everywhere.
Ciri dragged the enchantress under Yarpens overturned wagon. Paulie Dahlberg who suddenly found himself next to her helped while Geralt covered them both shoving Roach between them and the charging Scoiatael. All around the wagon battle seethed: Ciri heard shouting blades clashing horses snorting hooves clattering. Yarpen Wenck and Geralt surrounded on all sides by the elves fought like raging demons.
The fighters were suddenly parted by Regans span as he struggled in the coachmans box with a halfling wearing a lynx fur hat. The halfling was sitting on Regan trying to jab him with a long knife.
Yarpen deftly leaped onto the wagon caught the halfling by the neck and kicked him overboard. Regan gave a piercing yell grabbed the reins and lashed the horses. The span jerked the wagon rolled and gathered speed in a flash.
Circle Regan! roared Yarpen. Circle! Go round!
The wagon turned and descended on the elves again parting them. One of them sprang up grabbed the right lead-horse by the halter but couldnt stop him; the impetus threw him under the hooves and wheels. Ciri heard an excruciating scream.
Another elf galloping next to them gave a backhanded swipe with his sword. Yarpen ducked the blade rang against the hoop supporting the canvas and the momentum carried the elf forward. The dwarf hunched abruptly and vigorously swung his arm. The Scoiatael yelled stiffened in the saddle and tumbled to the ground. A martel protruded between his shoulder blades.
Come on then you whoresons! Yarpen roared whirling his axe. Who else? Chase a circle Regan! Go round!
Regan tossing his bloodied mane of hair hunched in the box amidst the whizzing of arrows howled like the damned and mercilessly lashed the horses on. The span dashed in a tight circle creating a moving barricade belching flames and smoke around the overturned wagon beneath which Ciri had dragged the semi-conscious battered magician.
Not far from them danced Wencks horse a mouse-coloured stallion. Wenck was hunched over; Ciri saw the white feathers of an arrow sticking out of his side. Despite the wound he was skilfully hacking his way past two elves on foot attacking him from both sides. As Ciri watched another arrow struck him in the back. The commissar collapsed forward onto his horses neck but remained in the saddle. Paulie Dahlberg rushed to his aid.
Ciri was left alone.
She reached for her sword. The blade which throughout her training had leaped out from her back in a flash would not let itself be drawn for anything; it resisted her stuck in its scabbard as if glued in tar. Amongst the whirl seething around her amongst moves so swift that they blurred in front of her eyes her sword seemed strangely unnaturally slow; it seemed ages would pass before it could be fully drawn. The ground trembled and shook. Ciri suddenly realised that it was not the ground. It was her knees.
Paulie Dahlberg keeping the elf charging at him at bay with his axe dragged the wounded Wenck along the ground. Roach flitted past beside the wagon and Geralt threw himself at the elf. He had lost his headband and his hair streamed out behind him with his speed. Swords clashed.
Another Scoiatael on foot leaped out from behind the wagon. Paulie abandoned Wenck pulled himself upright and brandished his axe. Then froze.
In front of him stood a dwarf wearing a hat adorned with a squirrels tail his black beard braided into two plaits. Paulie hesitated.
The black-beard did not hesitate for a second. He struck with both arms. The blade of the axe whirred and fell slicing into the collar-bone with a hide-ous crunch. Paulie fell instantly without a moan; it looked as if the force of the blow had broken both his knees.
Ciri screamed.
Yarpen Zigrin leaped from the wagon. The black-bearded dwarf spun and cut. Yarpen avoided the blow with an agile half-turn dodge grunted and struck ferociously chopping in to black-beard – throat jaw and face right up to the nose. The Scoiatael bent back and collapsed bleeding pounding his hands against the ground and tearing at the earth with his heels.
Geraaaallllttt! screamed Ciri feeling something move behind her. Sensing death behind her.
There was only a hazy shape caught in a turn a move and a flash but the girl – like lightning – reacted with a diagonal parry and feint taught her in Kaer Morhen. She caught the blow but had not been standing firmly enough had been leaning too far to the side to receive the full force. The strength of the strike threw her against the body of the wagon. Her sword slipped from her hand.
The beautiful long-legged elf wearing high boots standing in front of her grimaced fiercely and tossing her hair free of her lowered hood raised her sword. The sword flashed blindingly the bracelets on the Squirrels wrists glittered.
Ciri was in no state to move.
But the sword did not fall did not strike. Because the elf was not looking at Ciri but at the white rose pinned to her jerkin.
Aelirenn! shouted the Squirrel loudly as if wanting to shatter her hesitation with the cry. But she was too late. Geralt shoving Ciri away slashed her broadly across the chest with his sword. Blood spurted over the girls face and clothes red drops spattered on the white petals of the rose.
Aelirenn… moaned the elf shrilly collapsing to her knees. Before she fell on her face she managed to shout one more time. Loudly lengthily despairingly:
Shaerraweeeeedd!
Reality returned just as suddenly as it had disappeared. Through the monotonous dull hum which filled her ears Ciri began to hear voices. Through the flickering wet curtain of tears she began to see the living and the dead.
Ciri whispered Geralt who was kneeling next to her. Wake up.
A battle… she moaned sitting up. Geralt what—
Its all over. Thanks to the troops from Ban Gleán which came to our aid.
You werent… she whispered closing her eyes you werent neutral…
No I wasnt. But youre alive. Triss is alive.
How is she?
She hit her head falling out of the wagon when Yarpen tried to rescue it. But shes fine now. Treating the wounded.
Ciri cast her eyes around. Amidst the smoke from the last wagons burning out silhouettes of armed men flickered. And all around lay chests and barrels. Some of were shattered and the contents scattered. They had contained ordinary grey field stones. She stared at them astounded.
Aid for Demawend from Aedirn. Yarpen Zigrin standing nearby ground his teeth. Secret and exceptionally important aid. A convoy of special significance!
It was a trap?
The dwarf turned looked at her at Geralt. Then he looked back at the stones pouring from the barrels and spat.
Yes he confirmed. A trap.
For the Squirrels?
No.
The dead were arranged in a neat row. They lay next to each other not divided – elves humans and dwarves. Yannick Brass was amongst them. The dark-haired elf in the high boots was there. And the dwarf with his black plaited beard glistening with dried blood. And next to them…
Paulie! sobbed Regan Dahlberg holding his brothers head on his knees. Paulie! Why?
No one said anything. No one. Even those who knew why. Regan turned his contorted face wet with tears towards them.
What will I tell our mother? he wailed. What am I going to say to her?
No one said anything.
Not far away surrounded by soldiers in the black and gold of Kaedwen lay Wenck. He was breathing with difficulty and every breath forced bubbles of blood to his lips. Triss knelt next to him and a knight in shining armour stood over them both.
Well? asked the knight. Lady enchantress? Will he live?
Ive done everything I can. Triss got to her feet pinched her lips. But…
What?
They used this. She showed him an arrow with a strange head to it and struck it against a barrel standing by them. The tip of the arrow fell apart split into four barbed hook-like needles. The knight cursed.
Fredegard… Wenck uttered with difficulty. Fredegard listen—
You mustnt speak! said Triss severely. Or move! The spell is barely holding!
Fredegard the commissar repeated. A bubble of blood burst on his lips and another immediately appeared in its place. We were wrong… Everyone was wrong. Its not Yarpen… We suspected him wrongly… I vouch for him. Yarpen did not betray… Did not betr—
Silence! shouted the knight. Silence Vilfrid! Hey quick now bring the stretcher! Stretcher!
No need the magician said hollowly gazing at Wencks lips where no more bubbles appeared. Ciri turned away and pressed her face to Geralts side.
Fredegard drew himself up. Yarpen Zigrin did not look at him. He was looking at the dead. At Regan Dahlberg still kneeling over his brother.
It was necessary Zigrin said the knight. This is war. There was an order. We had to be sure…
Yarpen did not say anything. The knight lowered his eyes.
Forgive us he whispered.
The dwarf slowly turned his head looked at him. At Geralt. At Ciri. At them all. The humans.
What have you done to us? he asked bitterly. What have you done to us? What have you made of us?
No one answered him.
The eyes of the long-legged elf were glassy and dull. Her contorted lips were frozen in a soundless cry.
Geralt put his arms around Ciri. Slowly he unpinned the white rose spattered with dark stains from her jerkin and without a word threw it on the Squirrels body.
Farewell whispered Ciri. Farewell Rose of Shaerrawedd. Farewell and…
And forgive us added the witcher.
They roam the land importunate and insolent nominating themselves the stalkers of evil vanquishers of werewolves and exterminators of spectres extorting payment from the gullible and on receipt of their ignoble earnings moving on to dispense the same deceit in the near vicinity. The easiest access they find at cottages of honest simple and unwitting peasants who readily ascribe all misfortune and ill events to spells unnatural creatures and monsters the doings of windsprites or evil spirits. Instead of praying to the gods instead of bearing rich offerings to the temple such a simpleton is ready to give his last penny to the base witcher believing the witcher the godless changeling will turn around his fate and save him from misfortune.
Anonymous Monstrum or Description of the Witcher
I have nothing against witchers. Let them hunt vampires. As long as they pay taxes.
Radovid III the Bold King of Redania
If you thirst for justice hire a witcher.
Graffitti on the wall of the Faculty of Law University of Oxenfurt
CHAPTER FIVE
Did you say something?
The boy sniffed and pushed his over-sized velvet hat a pheasants feather hanging rakishly to the side back from his forehead.
Are you a knight? he repeated gazing at Geralt with wide eyes as blue as the sky.
No replied the witcher surprised that he felt like answering. Im not.
But youve got a sword! My daddys one of King Foltests knights. Hes got a sword too. Bigger than yours!
Geralt leaned his elbows on the railing and spat into the water eddying at the barges wake.
You carry it on your back the little snot persisted. The hat slipped down over his eyes again.
What?
The sword. On your back. Why have you got the sword on your back?
Because someone stole my oar.
The little snot opened his mouth demanding that the impressive gaps left by milk teeth be admired.
Move away from the side said the witcher. And shut your mouth or flies will get in.
The boy opened his mouth even wider.
Grey-haired yet stupid! snarled the little snots mother a richly attired noblewoman pulling her offspring away by the beaver collar of his cloak. Come here Everett! Ive told you so many times not to be familiar with the passing rabble!
Geralt sighed gazing at the outline of islands and islets looming through the morning mist. The barge as ungainly as a tortoise trudged along at an appropriate speed – that being the speed of a tortoise – dictated by the lazy Delta current. The passengers mostly merchants and peasants were dozing on their baggage. The witcher unfurled the scroll once more and returned to Ciris letter.
…I sleep in a large hall called a Dormitorium and my bed is terribly big I tell you. Im with the Intermediary Girls. There are twelve of us but Im most friendly with Eurneid Katye and Iola the Second. Whereas today I Ate Broth and the worst is that sometimes we have to Fast and get up very early at Dawn. Earlier than in Kaer Morhen. I will write the rest tomorrow for we shall presently be having Prayers. No one ever prayed in Kaer Morhen I wonder why we have to here. No doubt because this is a Temple.
Geralt. Mother Nenneke has read and said I must not write Silly Things and write clearly without mistakes. And about what Im studying and that I feel well and healthy. I feel well and am healthy if unfortunately Hungry but Soone be Dinner. And Mother Nenneke also said write that prayer has never harmed anybody yet neither me nor certainly you.
Geralt I have some free time again I will write therefore that I am studying. To read and write correct Runes. History. Nature. Poetry and Prose. To express myself well in the Common Speech and in the Elder Speech. I am best at the Elder Speech I can also write Elder Runes. I will write something for you and you will see for yourself. Elaine blath Feainnewedd. That meant: Beautiful flower child of the Sun. You see for yourself that I can. And also—
Now I can write again for I have found a new quill for the old one broke. Mother Nenneke read this and praised me that it was correct. That I am obedient she told me to write and that you should not worry. Dont worry Geralt.
Again I have some time so I will write what happened. When we were feeding the turkey hens I Iola and Katye One Enormous Turkey attacked us a red neck it had and was Terrible Horrible. First it attacked Iola and then it wanted to attack me but I was not afraid because it was smaller and slower than the Pendulum anyway. I dodged and did a pirouette and walloped it twice with a switch until it Made Off. Mother Nenneke does not allow me to carry My Sword here a pity for I would have shown that Turkey what I learned in Kaer Morhen. I already know that in the Elder Runes it would be written Caer aMuirehen and that it means Keep of the Elder Sea. So no doubt that is why there are Shells and Snails there as well as Fish imprinted on the stones. And Cintra is correctly written Xintrea. Whereas my name comes from Zireael for that means Swallow and that means that…
Are you busy reading?
He raised his head.
I am. So? Has anything happened? Someone noticed something?
No nothing replied the skipper wiping his hands on his leather jerkin. Theres calm on the water. But theres a mist and were already near Crane Islet—
I know. Its the sixth time Ive sailed this way Boatbug not counting the return journeys. Ive come to know the trail. My eyes are open dont worry.
The skipper nodded and walked away to the prow stepping over travellers packages and bundles stacked everywhere. Squeezed in amidships the horses snorted and pounded their hooves on the deck-boards. They were in the middle of the current in dense fog. The prow of the barge ploughed the surface of water lilies parting their clumps. Geralt turned back to his reading.
…that means I have an elven name. But I am not after all an elf Geralt there is also talk about the Squirrels here. Sometimes even the Soldiers come and ask questions and say that we must not treat wounded elves. I have not squealed a word to anyone about what happened in spring dont worry. And I also remember to practise dont think otherwise. I go to the park and train when I have time. But not always for I also have to work in the kitchen or in the orchard like all the girls. And we also have a terrible amount of studying to do. But never mind I will study. After all you too studied in the Temple Mother Nenneke told me. And she also told me that just any idiot can brandish a sword but a witcher-girl must be wise.
Geralt you promised to come. Come.
Your Ciri
PS Come come.
PS II. Mother Nenneke told me to end with Praise be to Great Melitele may her blessing and favour always go with you. And may nothing happen to you.
Ciri
Id like to go to Ellander he thought putting away the letter. But its dangerous. I might lead them to— These letters have got to end. Nenneke makes use of temple mail but still… Damn it its too risky.
Hmmm… Hmm…
What now Boatbug? Weve passed Crane Islet.
And without incident thank the gods sighed the skipper. Ha Geralt I see this is going to be another peaceful trip. Any moment now the mist is going to clear and when the sun peeps through the fear is over. The monster wont show itself in the sunlight.
That wont worry me in the least.
So I should think. Boatbug smiled wryly. The company pays you by the trip. Regardless whether something happens or not a penny falls into your pouch doesnt it?
You ask as if you didnt know. What is this – envy talking? That I earn money standing leaning against the side watching the lapwings? And what do you get paid for? The same thing. For being on board. When everything is going smoothly you havent got anything to do. You stroll from prow to stern grinning at the women or trying to entice merchants to have a drink. Ive been hired to be on board too. Just in case. The transport is safe because a witcher is on board. The cost of the witcher is included in the price of the trip right?
Well that certainly is true sighed the skipper. The company wont lose out. I know them well. This is the fifth year I sail the Delta for them from Foam to Novigrad from Novigrad to Foam. Well to work witcher sir. You go on leaning against the side and Ill go for a stroll from prow to stern.
The mist thinned a little. Geralt extracted another letter from his bag one he had recently received from a strange courier. He had already read it about thirty times.
Dear friend…
The witcher swore quietly looking at the sharp angular even runes drawn with energetic sweeps of the pen faultlessly reflecting the authors mood. He felt once again the desire to try to bite his own backside in fury. When he was writing to the enchantress a month ago he had spent two nights in a row contemplating how best to begin. Finally he had decided on Dear friend. Now he had his just deserts.
Dear friend your unexpected letter – which I received not quite three years after we last saw each other – has given me much joy. My joy is all the greater as various rumours have been circulating about your sudden and violent death. It is a good thing that you have decided to disclaim them by writing to me; it is a good thing too that you are doing so so soon. From your letter it appears that you have lived a peaceful wonderfully boring life devoid of all sensation. These days such a life is a real privilege dear friend and I am happy that you have managed to achieve it.
I was touched by the sudden concern which you deigned to show as to my health dear friend. I hasten with the news that yes I now feel well; the period of indisposition is behind me I have dealt with the difficulties the description of which I shall not bore you with.
It worries and troubles me very much that the unexpected present you received from Fate brings you worries. Your supposition that this requires professional help is absolutely correct. Although your description of the difficulty – quite understandably – is enigmatic I am sure I know the Source of the problem. And I agree with your opinion that the help of yet another magician is absolutely necessary. I feel honoured to be the second to whom you turn. What have I done to deserve to be so high on your list?
Rest assured my dear friend; and if you had the intention of supplicating the help of additional magicians abandon it because there is no need. I leave without delay and go to the place which you indicated in an oblique yet to me understandable way. It goes without saying that I leave in absolute secrecy and with great caution. I will surmise the nature of the trouble on the spot and will do all that is in my power to calm the gushing source. I shall try in so doing not to appear any worse than other ladies to whom you have turned are turning or usually turn with your supplications. I am after all your dear friend. Your valuable friendship is too important to me to disappoint you dear friend.
Should you in the next few years wish to write to me do not hesitate for a moment. Your letters invariably give me boundless pleasure.
Your friend Yennefer
The letter smelled of lilac and gooseberries.
Geralt cursed.
He was torn from his reverie by the movement on deck and a rocking of the barge that indicated they were changing course. Some of the passengers crowded starboard. Skipper Boatbug was yelling orders from the bow; the barge was slowly and laboriously turning towards the Temerian shore leaving the fairway and ceding right of way to two ships looming through the mist. The witcher watched with curiosity.
The first was an enormous three-masted galliass at least a hundred and forty yards long carrying an amaranth flag with a silver eagle. Behind it its forty oars rhythmically hard at work glided a smaller slim galley adorned with a black ensign with gold-red chevron.
Ooohh what huge dragons said Boatbug standing next to the witcher. Theyre pushing a heck of a wave the way theyre ploughing the river.
Interesting muttered Geralt. The galliass is sailing under the Redanian flag but the galley is from Aedirn.
From Aedirn very much so confirmed the skipper. And it carries the Governor of Hagges pennon. But note both ships have sharp keels near on four yards draught. That means theyre not sailing to Hagge itself – they wouldnt cross the rapids and shallows up the river. Theyre heading to Foam or White Bridge. And look there are swarms of soldiers on the decks. These arent merchants. Theyre war ships Geralt.
Someone important is on that galliass. Theyve set up a tent on deck.
Thats right thats how the nobles travel. Boatbug nodded picking his teeth with a splinter peeled from the barges side. Its safer by river. Elven commandos are roaming the forests. Theres no knowing which tree an arrows going to come flying from. But on the water theres no fear. Elves like cats dont like water. They prefer dwelling in brushwood…
Its got to be someone really important. The tent is rich.
Thats right could be. Who knows maybe King Vizimir himself is favouring the river with his presence? All sorts of people are travelling this way now… And while were at it in Foam you asked me to keep my ears open in case anyone was interested in you asking about you. Well that weakling there you see him?
Dont point Boatbug. Who is he?
How should I know? Ask him yourself hes coming over. Just look at his stagger! And the waters as still as a mirror pox on it; if it were to swell just a little hed probably be on all fours the oaf.
The oaf turned out to be a short thin man of uncertain age dressed in a large woollen and none-too-clean cloak pinned in place with a circular brass brooch. Its pin clearly lost had been replaced by a crooked nail with a flattened head. The man approached cleared his throat and squinted with his myopic eyes.
Hmm… Do I have the pleasure of speaking to Geralt of Rivia the witcher?
Yes sir. You do.
Allow me to introduce myself. I am Linus Pitt Master Tutor and Lecturer in Natural History at the Oxenfurt Academy.
My very great pleasure.
Hmm… Ive been told that you sir are on commission from the Malatius and Grock Company to protect this transport. Apparently from the danger of some monster attack. I wonder what this monster could be.
I wonder myself. The witcher leaned against the ships side gazing at the dark outline of the marshy meadows on the Temerian river bank looming in the mist. And have come to the conclusion that I have most likely been hired as a precaution against an attack from a Scoiatael commando force said to be roaming the vicinity. This is my sixth journey between Foam and Novigrad and no aeschna has shown itself—
Aeschna? Thats some kind of common name. I would rather you used the scientific terminology. Hmm… aeschna… I truly do not know which species you have in mind—
Im thinking of a bumpy and rough-skinned monster four yards in length resembling a stump overgrown with algae and with ten paws and jaws like cut-saws.
The description leaves a lot to be desired as regards scientific precision. Could it be one of the species of the Hyphydridae family?
I dont exclude the possibility sighed Geralt. The aeschna as far as I know belongs to an exceptionally nasty family for which no name can be abusive. The thing is Master Tutor that apparently a member of this unsympathetic clan attacked the Companys barge two weeks ago. Here on the Delta not far from where we are.
He who says this – Linus Pitt gave a screeching laugh – is either an ignoramus or a liar. Nothing like that could have happened. I know the fauna of the Delta very well. The family Hyphydridae does not appear here at all. Nor do any other quite so dangerous predatory species. The considerable salinity and atypical chemical composition of the water especially during high tide—
During high tide interrupted Geralt when the incoming tide wave passes the Novigrad canals there is no water – to use the word precisely – in the Delta at all. There is a liquid made up of excrement soapsuds oil and dead rats.
Unfortunately unfortunately. The Master Tutor grew sad. Degradation of the environment… You may not believe it but of more than two thousand species of fish living in this river only fifty years ago not more than nine hundred remain. It is truly sad.
They both leaned against the railing and stared into the murky green depths. The tide must have already been coming in because the stench of the water was growing stronger. The first dead rats appeared.
The white-finned bullhead has died off completely. Linus Pitt broke the silence. The mullet has died as have the snakehead the kithara the striped loach the redbelly dace the long-barbel gudgeon the king pickerel…
At a distance of about twenty yards from the ships side the water surged. For a moment both men saw a twenty-pound or more specimen of the king pickerel swallowing a dead rat and disappearing into the depths having gracefully flashed its tail fin.
What was that? The Master Tutor shuddered.
I dont know. Geralt looked at the sky. A penguin maybe?
The scholar glanced at him and bit his lips.
In all certainty it was not however your mythical aeschna! I have been told that witchers possess considerable knowledge about some rare species. But you you not only repeat rumours and tales you are also mocking me in a most crude manner… Are you listening to me at all?
The mist isnt going to lift said Geralt quietly.
Huh?
The wind is still weak. When we sail into the arm of the river between the islets it will be even weaker. It is going to be misty right up to Novigrad.
Im not going to Novigrad. I get off at Oxenfurt declared Pitt dryly. And the mist? It is surely not so thick as to render navigation impossible; what do you think?
The little boy in the feathered hat ran past them and leaned far out trying with his stick to fish out a rat bouncing against the boat. Geralt approached and tore the stick from him.
Scram. Dont get near the side!
Muuuummyyyy!
Everett! Come here immediately!
The Master Tutor pulled himself up and glared at the witcher with piercing eyes.
It seems you really do believe we are in some danger?
Master Pitt said Geralt as calmly as he could two weeks ago something pulled two people off the deck of one of the Companys barges. In the mist. I dont know what it was. Maybe it was your hyphydra or whatever its name is. Maybe it was a long-barbel gudgeon. But I think it was an aeschna.
The scholar pouted. Conjecture he declared should always be based on solid scientific foundations not on rumours and gossip. I told you the hyphydra which you persist in calling an aeschna does not appear in the waters of the Delta. It was wiped out a good half-century ago due – incidentally – to the activity of individuals such as yourself who are prepared to kill anything that does not instantly look right without forethought tests observation or considering its ecological niche.
For a moment Geralt felt a sincere desire to tell the scholar where he could put the aeschna and its niche but he changed his mind.
Master Tutor he said calmly one of those pulled from the deck was a young pregnant girl. She wanted to cool her swollen feet in the water. Theoretically her child could one day have become chancellor of your college. What do you have to say to such an approach to ecology?
It is unscientific; it is emotional and subjective. Nature is governed by its own rules and although these rules are cruel and ruthless they should not be amended. It is a struggle for survival! The Master Tutor leaned over the railing and spat into the water. And nothing can justify the extermination of a species even a predatory one. What do you say to that?
I say that its dangerous to lean out like that. There might be an aeschna in the vicinity. Do you want to try out the aeschnas struggle for survival on your own skin?
Linus Pitt let go of the railing and abruptly jumped away. He turned a little pale but immediately regained his self-assurance and pursed his lips again.
No doubt you know a great deal about these fantastical aeschna witcher?
Certainly less than you. So maybe we should make use of the opportunity? Enlighten me Master Tutor expound a little upon your knowledge of aquatic predators. Ill willingly listen and the journey wont seem so long.
Are you making fun of me?
Not at all. I would honestly like to fill in the gaps in my education.
Hmmm… If you really… Why not? Listen then to me. The Hyphydridae family belonging to the Amphipoda order includes four species known to science. Two live exclusively in tropical waters. In our climate on the other hand one can come across – though very rarely now – the not-so-large Hyphydra longicauda and the somewhat larger Hyphydra marginata. The biotope of both species is stagnant water or water which flows very slowly. The species are indeed predatory preferring to feed on warm-blooded creatures… Have you anything to add?
Not right now. Im listening with bated breath.
Yes hmm… Mention can also be found in the great books of the subspecies Pseudohyphydra which lives in the marshy waters of Angren. However the learned Bumbler of Aldersberg recently proved that this is an entirely different species one from the Mordidae family. It feeds exclusively on fish and small amphibians. It has been named Ichthyovorax bumbleri.
The monsters lucky smiled the witcher. Thats the third time he was named.
How come?
The creature youre talking about is an ilyocoris called a cinerea in Elder Speech. And if the learned Bumbler states that it feeds exclusively on fish then I assume he has never bathed in a lake with an ilyocoris. But Bumbler is right on one account: the aeschna has as much in common with a cinerea as I do with a fox. We both like to eat duck.
What cinerea? The Master Tutor bridled. The cinerea is a mythical creature! Indeed your lack of knowledge disappoints me. Truly I am amazed—
I know interrupted Geralt. I lose a great deal of my charm when one gets to know me better. Nevertheless I will permit myself to correct your theories a little further Master Pitt. So aeschnae have always lived in the Delta and continue to do so. Indeed there was a time when it seemed that they had become extinct. For they lived off those small seals—
River porpoises corrected the Master Tutor. Dont be an ignoramus. Dont mistake seals for—
—they lived off porpoises and the porpoises were killed off because they looked like seals. They provided seal-like skins and fat. Then later canals were dug out in the upper reaches of the river dams and barriers built. The current grew weaker; the Delta got silted up and overgrown. And the aeschna underwent mutation. It adapted.
Huh?
Humans have rebuilt its food chain. They supplied warm-blooded creatures in the place of porpoises. Sheep cattle swine began to be transported across the Delta. The aeschnae learned in a flash that every barge raft or barque on the Delta was in fact a large platter of food.
And the mutation? You spoke of mutation!
This liquid manure – Geralt indicated the green water – seems to suit the aeschna. It enhances its growth. The damn thing can become so large apparently that it can drag a cow off a raft with no effort whatsoever. Pulling a human off a deck is nothing. Especially the deck of one of these scows the Company uses to transport passengers. You can see for yourselves how low it sits in the water.
The Master Tutor quickly backed away from the ships side as far as the carts and baggage allowed.
I heard a splash! he gasped staring at the mist between the islets. Witcher! I heard—
Calm down. Apart from the splashing you can also hear oars squeaking in rowlocks. Its the customs officers from the Redanian shore. Youll see them in a moment and theyll cause more of a commotion than three or even four aeschnae.
Boatbug ran past. He cursed obscenely as the little boy in the feathered hat got under his feet. The passengers and messengers all extremely nervous were going through their possessions trying to hide any smuggled goods.
After a little while a large boat hit the side of the barge and four lively angry and very noisy individuals jumped on board. They surrounded the skipper bawled threateningly in an effort to make themselves and their positions seem important then threw themselves enthusiastically at the baggage and belongings of the travellers.
They check even before we land! complained Boatbug coming up to the witcher and the Master Tutor. Thats illegal isnt it? After all were not on Redanian soil yet. Redania is on the right bank half a mile from here!
No contradicted the Master Tutor. The boundary between Redania and Temeria runs through the centre of the Pontar current.
And how the shit do you measure a current? This is the Delta! Islets shoals and skerries are constantly changing its layout – the Fairway is different every day! Its a real curse! Hey! You little snot! Leave that boathook alone or Ill tan your arse black and blue! Honourable lady! Watch your child! A real curse!
Everett! Leave that alone or youll get dirty!
Whats in that chest? shouted the customs officers. Hey untie that bundle! Whose is that cart? Any currency? Is there any currency I say? Temerian or Nilfgaardian money?
Thats what a customs war looks like Linus Pitt commented on the chaos with a wise expression on his face. Vizimir forced Novigrad to introduce the ius stapulae. Foltest of Temeria retaliated with a retortive absolute ius stapulae in Wyzima and Gors Velen. That was a great blow for Redanian merchants so Vizimir increased the tax on Temerian products. He is defending the Redanian economy. Temeria is flooded with cheap goods coming from Nilfgaardian manufactories. Thats why the customs officers are so keen. If too many Nilfgaardian goods were to cross the border the Redanian economy would collapse. Redania has practically no manufactories and the craftsmen wouldnt be able to cope with competition.
In a nutshell smiled Geralt Nilfgaard is slowly taking over with its goods and gold that which it couldnt take with arms. Isnt Temeria defending itself? Hasnt Foltest blocked his southern borders?
How? The goods are coming through Mahakam Brugge Verden and the ports in Cidaris. Profit is all the merchants are interested in not politics. If King Foltest were to block his borders the merchants guilds would raise a terrible outcry—
Any currency? snarled an approaching customs officer with bloodshot eyes. Anything to declare?
Im a scholar!
Be a prince if you like! Im asking what youre bringing in?
Leave them Boratek said the leader of the group a tall broad-shouldered customs officer with a long black moustache. Dont you recognise the witcher? Greetings Geralt. Do you know him? Is he a scholar? So youre going to Oxenfurt are you sir? With no luggage?
Quite so. To Oxenfurt. With no luggage.
The customs officer pulled out an enormous handkerchief and wiped his forehead moustache and neck.
And hows it going today Geralt? he asked. The monster show itself?
No. And you Olsen seen anything?
I havent got time to look around. Im working.
My daddy declared Everett creeping up without a sound is one of King Foltests knights! And hes got an even bigger moustache than you!
Scram kid said Olsen then sighed heavily. Got any vodka Geralt?
No.
But I do. The learned man from the Academy pulling a flat skin from his bag surprised them all.
And Ive got a snack boasted Boatbug looming up as if from nowhere. Smoked burbot!
And my daddy—
Scarper little snot.
They sat on coils of rope in the shade of the carts parked amidships sipping from the skin and devouring the burbot in turn. Olsen had to leave them momentarily when an argument broke out. A dwarven merchant from Mahakam was demanding a lower tax and trying to convince the customs officers that the furs he was bringing in were not silver fox but exceptionally large cats. The mother of the nosey and meddlesome Everett on the other hand did not want to undergo an inspection at all shrilly evoking her husbands rank and the privileges of nobility.
The ship trailing braids of gathered nenuphars water lilies and pond-weed at its sides slowly glided along the wide strait amongst shrub-covered islets. Bumble bees buzzed menacingly amongst the reeds and tortoises whistled from time to time. Cranes standing on one leg gazed at the water with stoical calm knowing there was no point in getting worked up – sooner or later a fish would swim up of its own accord.
And what do you think Geralt? Boatbug uttered licking the burbots skin clean. Another quiet voyage? You know what Id say? That monsters no fool. It knows youre lying in ambush. Hearken to this – at home in our village there was a river and in that river lived an otter which would creep into the yard and strangle hens. It was so crafty that it never crept in when Father was home or me and my brothers. It only showed up when Grandpa was left by himself. And our grandpa hearken was a bit feeble in the head and paralysis had taken his legs. It was as if the otter that son-of-a-bitch knew. Well then one day our pa—
Ten per cent ad valorem! yelled the dwarven merchant from amidships waving the fox skin about. Thats how much I owe you and Im not going to pay a copper more!
Then Ill confiscate the lot! roared Olsen angrily. And Ill let the Novigrad guards know so youll go to the clink together with your Valorem! Boratek charge him to the penny! Hey have you left anything for me? Have you guzzled it down to the dregs?
Sit down Olsen. Geralt made room for him on the ropes. Stressful job youve got I see.
Ah Ive had it up to my ears sighed the customs officer then took a swig from the skin and wiped his moustache. Im throwing it in Im going back to Aedirn. Im an honest Vengerberger who followed his sister and brother-in-law to Redania but now Im going back. You know what Geralt? Im set on enlisting in the army. They say King Demawend is recruiting for special troops. Half a years training in a camp and then its a soldiers pay three times what I get here bribes included. This burbots too salty.
Ive heard about this special army confirmed Boatbug. Its getting ready for the Squirrels because the regular army cant deal with the elven commandos. They particularly want half-elves to enlist I hear. But that camp where they teach them to fight is real hell apparently. They leave fifty-fifty some to get soldiers pay some to the burial ground feet first.
And so it should be said the customs officer. The special army skipper isnt just any old unit. Its not some shitty shield-bearers who just need to be shown which end of the javelin pricks. A special army has to know how to fight like nobodys business!
So youre such a fierce warrior are you Olsen? And the Squirrels arent you afraid of them? That theyll spike your arse with arrows?
Big deal! I know how to draw a bow too. Ive already fought Nilfgaard so elves are nothing to me.
They say Boatbug said with a shudder if someone falls into their hands alive the Scoiataels… Its better they hadnt been born. Theyll be tortured horrifically.
Ah do yourself a favour and shut your face skipper. Youre babbling like a woman. War is war. You whack the enemy in the backside and they whack you back. Captured elves arent pampered by our men either dont you worry.
The tactic of terror. Linus Pitt threw the burbots head and backbone overboard. Violence breeds violence. Hatred has grown into hearts… and has poisoned kindred blood…
What? Olsen grimaced. Use a human language!
Hard times are upon us.
So they are true agreed Boatbug. Theres sure to be a great war. Every day the sky is thick with ravens they smell the carrion already. And the seeress Ithlin foretold the end of the world. White Light will come to be the White Chill will then follow. Or the other way round Ive forgotten how it goes. And people are saying signs were also visible in the sky—
You keep an eye on the fairway skipper stead of the sky or this skiff of yours is going to end up in the shallows. Ah were already level with Oxenfurt. Just look you can see the Cask!
The mist was clearly less dense now so that they could see the hillocks and marshy meadows of the right bank and rising above them a part of the aqueduct.
That gentlemen is the experimental sewage purification plant boasted the Master Tutor refusing his turn to drink. A great success for science a great achievement for the Academy. We repaired the old elven aqueduct canals and sediment trap and were already neutralising the sewers of the university town and surrounding villages and farms. What you call the Cask is a sediment trap. A great success for science—
Heads down heads down! warned Olsen ducking behind the rail. Last year when that thing exploded the shit flew as far as Crane Islet.
The barge sailed in between islands and the squat tower of the sediment trap and the aqueduct disappeared in the mist. Everyone sighed with relief.
Arent you sailing straight by way of the Oxenfurt arm Boatbug? asked Olsen.
Im putting in at Acorn Bay first. To collect fish traders and merchants from the Temerian side.
Hmm… The customs officer scratched his neck. At the Bay… Listen Geralt you arent in any conflict with the Temerians by any chance are you?
Why? Was someone asking about me?
Youve guessed it. As you see I remember you asked me to keep an eye out for anyone interested in you. Well just imagine the Temerian Guards have been enquiring about you. The customs officers there with whom I have a good understanding told me. Something smells funny here Geralt.
The water? Linus Pitt was afraid glancing nervously at the aqueduct and the great scientific success.
That little snotrag? Boatbug pointed to Everett who was still milling around nearby.
Im not talking about that. The customs officer winced. Listen Geralt the Temerian customs men said these Guards were asking strange questions. They know you sail with the Malatius and Grock barges. They asked… if you sail alone. If you have— Bloody hell just dont laugh! They were going on about some underage girl who has been seen in your company apparently.
Boatbug chuckled. Linus Pitt looked at the witcher with eyes filled with the distaste which befitted someone looking at a white-haired man who has drawn the attention of the law on account of his preference for underage girls.
Thats why Olsen hawked the Temerian customs officers thought it might be some private matters being settled into which the Guards had been drawn. Like… Well the girls family or her betrothed. So the officers cautiously asked who was behind all this. And they found out. Well apparently its a nobleman with a tongue ready as a chancellors neither poor nor miserly who calls himself… Rience or something like that. Hes got a red mark on his left cheek as if from a burn. Do you know anyone like that?
Geralt got up.
Boatbug he said. Im disembarking in Acorn Bay.
Hows that? And what about the monster?
Thats your problem.
Speaking of problems interrupted Olsen just look starboard Geralt. Speak of the devil.
From behind an island from the swiftly lifting mist loomed a lighter. A black burgee dotted with silver lilies fluttered lazily from its mast. The crew consisted of several men wearing the pointed hats of Temerian Guards.
Geralt quickly reached into his bag and pulled out both letters – the one from Ciri and the one from Yennefer. He swiftly tore them into tiny shreds and threw them into the river. The customs officer watched him in silence.
Whatever are you doing may I ask?
No. Boatbug take care of my horse.
You want to… Olsen frowned. You intend to—
What I intend is my business. Dont get mixed up in this or therell be an incident. Theyre sailing under the Temerian flag.
Bugger their flag. The customs officer moved his cutlass to a more accessible place on his belt and wiped his enamelled gorget an eagle on a red background with his sleeve. If Im on board carrying out an inspection then this is Redania. I will not allow—
Olsen the witcher interrupted grabbing him by the sleeve dont interfere please. The man with a burned face isnt on the lighter. And I have to know who he is and what he wants. Ive got to see him face to face.
Youre going to let them put you in the stocks? Dont be a fool! If this is a private settling of scores privately commissioned revenge then as soon as you get past the islet on the Whirl youll fly overboard with an anchor round your neck. Youll be face to face all right but itll be with crabs at the bottom of the river!
Theyre Temerian Guards not bandits.
Is that so? Then just look at their mugs! Besides Ill know instantly who they really are. Youll see.
The lighter approaching rapidly reached the barge. One of the Guards threw the rope over while another attached the boathook to the railing.
I be the skipper! Boatbug blocked the way as three men leaped on deck. This is a ship belonging to the Malatius and Grock Company! What…
One of the men stocky and bald pushed him brusquely aside with his arm thick as the branch of an oak.
A certain Gerald called Gerald of Rivia! he thundered measuring the skipper with his eyes. Is such a one on board?
No.
I am he. The witcher stepped over the bundles and packages and drew near. I am Geralt and called Geralt. What is this about?
I arrest you in the name of the law. The bald mans eyes skimmed over the passengers. Wheres the girl?
Im alone.
You lie!
Hold it hold it. Olsen emerged from behind the witchers back and put his hand on his shoulder. Keep calm no shouting. Youre too late Temerians. He has already been arrested and in the name of the law at that. I caught him. For smuggling. Im taking him to the guardhouse in Oxenfurt according to orders.
Whats that? The bald man frowned. And the girl?
There is no girl here nor has there been.
The Guards looked at each other in uncertain silence. Olsen grinned broadly and turned up his black moustache.
You know what well do? he snorted. Sail with us to Oxenfurt Temerians. We and you are simple folk how are we to know the ins and outs of law? The commandant of the Oxenfurt guardhouse is a wise and worldly man hell judge the matter. You know our commandant dont you? Because he knows yours the one from the Bay very well. Youll present your case to him… Show him your orders and seals… You do have a warrant with all the necessary seals dont you eh?
The bald man just stared grimly at the customs officer.
I dont have the time or the inclination to go to Oxenfurt! he suddenly bawled. Im taking the rogue to our shore and thats that! Stran Vitek! Get on with it search the barge! Find me the girl quick as a flash!
One minute slow down. Olsen was not perturbed by the yelling and drew out his words slowly and distinctly. Youre on the Redanian side of the Delta Temerians. You dont have anything to declare by any chance do you? Or any contraband? Well have a look presently. Well do a search. And if we do find something then you will have to take the trouble to go to Oxenfurt for a while after all. And we if we wish to we can always find something. Boys! Come here!
My daddy squeaked Everett all of a sudden appearing at the bald mans side as if from nowhere is a knight! Hes got an even bigger blade than you!
In a flash the bald man caught the boy by his beaver collar and snatched him up from the deck knocking his feathered hat off. Wrapping his arm around the boys waist he put the cutlass to his throat.
Move back! he roared. Move back or Ill slash the brats neck!
Evereeeeett! howled the noblewoman.
Curious methods said the witcher slowly you Temerian Guards use. Indeed so curious that it makes it hard to believe youre Guards.
Shut your face! yelled the bald one shaking Everett who was squealing like a piglet. Stran Vitek get him! Fetter him and take him to the lighter! And you move back! Wheres the girl Im asking you? Give her to me or Ill slaughter this little snot!
Slaughter him then drawled Olsen giving a sign to his men and pulling out his cutlass. Is he mine or something? And when youve slaughtered him we can talk.
Dont interfere! Geralt threw his sword on the deck and with a gesture held back the customs officers and Boatbugs sailors. Im yours liar-guard sir. Let the boy go.
To the lighter! The bald man retreated to the side of the barge without letting Everett go and grabbed a rope. Vitek tie him up! And all of you to the stern! If any of you move the kid dies!
Have you lost your mind Geralt? growled Olsen.
Dont interfere!
Evereeeett!
The Temerian lighter suddenly rocked and bounced away from the barge. The water exploded with a splash and two long green coarse paws bristling with spikes like the limbs of a praying mantis shot out. The paws grabbed the Guard holding the boathook and in the wink of an eye dragged him under water. The bald Guard howled savagely released Everett and clung onto the ropes which dangled from the lighters side. Everett plopped into the already-reddening water. Everybody – those on the barge and those on the lighter – started to scream as if possessed.
Geralt tore himself away from the two men trying to bind him. He thumped one in the chin then threw him overboard. The other took a swing at the witcher with an iron hook but faltered and drooped into Olsens hands with a cutlass buried to the hilt in his ribs.
The witcher leaped over the low railing. Before the water – thick with algae – closed in over his head he heard Linus Pitt the Lecturer of Natural History at the Academy of Oxenfurt shout What is that? What species? No such animal exists!
He emerged just by the Temerian lighter miraculously avoiding the fishing spear which one of baldys men was jabbing at him. The Guard didnt have time to strike him again before he splashed into the water with an arrow in his throat. Geralt catching hold of the dropped spear rebounded with his legs against the side of the boat dived into the seething whirlpool and forcefully jabbed at something hoping it was not Everett.
Its impossible! he heard the Master Tutors cries. Such an animal cant exist! At least it shouldnt!
I agree with that last statement entirely thought the witcher jabbing the aeschnas armour bristling with its hard bumps. The corpse of the Temerian Guard was bouncing up and down inertly in the sickle-shaped jaws of the monster trailing blood. The aeschna swung its flat tail violently and dived to the bottom raising clouds of silt.
He heard a thin cry. Everett stirring the water like a little dog had caught hold of baldys legs as he was trying to climb on to the lighter by the ropes hanging down the side. The ropes gave way and both the Guard and the boy disappeared with a gurgle under the surface of the water. Geralt threw himself in their direction and dived. The fact that he almost immediately came across the little boys beaver collar was nothing but luck. He tore Everett from the entangled algae swam out on his back and kicking with his legs reached the barge.
Here Geralt! Here! He heard cries and shouts each louder than the other: Give him here! The rope! Catch hold of the rope! Pooooox! The rope! Geraaalt! With the boathook with the boathook! My booyyyy!.
Someone tore the boy from his arms and dragged him upwards. At the same moment someone else caught Geralt from behind struck him in the back of the head covered him over with his bulk and pushed him under the water. Geralt let go of the fishing spear turned and caught his assailant by the belt. With his other hand he tried to grab him by the hair but in vain. It was baldy.
Both men emerged but only for an instant. The Temerian lighter had already moved a little from the barge and both Geralt and baldy locked in an embrace were in between them. Baldy caught Geralt by the throat; the witcher dug a thumb in his eye. The Guard yelled let go and swam away. Geralt could not swim – something was holding him by the leg and dragging him into the depths. Next to him half a body bounced to the surface like a cork. And then he knew what was holding him; the information Linus Pitt yelled from the barge deck was unnecessary.
Its an anthropod! Order Amphipoda! Group Mandibulatissimae!
Geralt violently thrashed his arms in the water trying to yank his leg from the aeschnas claws as they pulled him towards the rhythmical snap of its jaws. The Master Tutor was correct once again. The jaws were anything but small.
Grab hold of the rope! yelled Olsen. The rope grab it!
A fishing spear whistled past the witchers ear and plunged with a smack into the monsters algae-ridden armour as it surfaced. Geralt caught hold of the shaft pressed down on it bounced forcefully away brought his free leg in and kicked the aeschna violently. He tore himself away from the spiked paws leaving his boot a fair part of his trousers and a good deal of skin behind. More fishing spears and harpoons whizzed through the air most of them missing their mark. The aeschna drew in its paws swished its tail and gracefully dived into the green depths.
Geralt seized the rope which fell straight onto his face. The boathook catching him painfully in the side caught him by the belt. He felt a tug rode upwards and taken up by many hands rolled over the railing and tumbled on deck dripping with water slime weeds and blood. The passengers barge crew and customs officers crowded around him. Leaning over the railings the dwarf with the fox furs and Olsen were firing their bows. Everett wet and green with algae his teeth clattering sobbed in his mothers arms explaining to everybody that he hadnt meant to do it.
Geralt! Boatbug yelled at his ear are you dead?
Damn it… The witcher spat out seaweed. Im too old for this sort of thing… Too old…
Nearby the dwarf released his bowstring and Olsen roared joyously.
Right in the belly! Ooh-ha-ha! Great shot my furry friend! Hey Boratek give him back his money! He deserves a tax reduction for that shot!
Stop… wheezed the witcher attempting in vain to stand up. Dont kill them all damn it! I need one of them alive!
Weve left one the customs officer assured him. The bald one who was bickering with me. Weve shot the rest. But baldy is over there swimming away. Ill fish him out right away. Give us the boathooks!
Discovery! A great discovery! shouted Linus Pitt jumping up and down by the barge side. An entirely new species unknown to science! Absolutely unique! Oh Im so grateful to you witcher! As of today this species is going to appear in books as… As Geraltia maxiliosa pitti!
Master Tutor Geralt groaned if you really want to show me your gratitude let that damn thing be called Everetia.
Just as beautiful consented the scholar. Oh what a discovery! What a unique magnificent specimen! No doubt the only one alive in the Delta—
No uttered Boatbug suddenly and grimly. Not the only one. Look!
The carpet of water lilies adhering to the nearby islet trembled and rocked violently. They saw a wave and then an enormous long body resembling a rotting log swiftly paddling its many limbs and snapping its jaws. The bald man looked back howled horrifically and swam away stirring up the water with his arms and legs.
What a specimen what a specimen Pitt quickly noted thrilled no end. Prehensile cephalic limbs four pairs of chelae… Strong tail-fan… Sharp claws…
The bald man looked back again and howled even more horribly. And the Everetia maxiliosa pitti extended its prehensile cephalic limbs and swung its tail-fan vigorously. The bald man surged the water in a desperate hopeless attempt to escape.
May the water be light to him said Olsen. But he did not remove his hat.
My daddy rattled Everett with his teeth can swim faster than that man!
Take the child away growled the witcher.
The monster spread its claws snapped its jaws. Linus Pitt grew pale and turned away.
Baldy shrieked briefly choked and disappeared below the surface. The water throbbed dark red.
Pox. Geralt sat down heavily on the deck. Im too old for this sort of thing… Far far too old…
What can be said? Dandilion simply adored the town of Oxenfurt.
The university grounds were surrounded by a wall and around this wall was another ring – that of the huge loud breathless busy and noisy townlet. The wooden colourful town of Oxenfurt with its narrow streets and pointed roofs. The town of Oxenfurt which lived off the Academy off its students lecturers scholars researchers and their guests who lived off science and knowledge off what accompanies the process of learning. In the town of Oxenfurt from the by-products and chippings of theory practice business and profit were born.
The poet rode slowly along a muddy crowded street passing workshops studios stalls shops small and large where thanks to the Academy tens of thousands of articles and wonderful things were produced and sold which were unattainable in other corners of the world where their production was considered impossible or pointless. He passed inns taverns stands huts counters and portable grills from which floated the appetising aromas of elaborate dishes unknown elsewhere in the world seasoned in ways not known elsewhere with garnishes and spices neither known of nor used anywhere else. This was Oxenfurt the colourful joyful noisy and sweet-smelling town of miracles into which shrewd people full of initiative had turned dry and useless theories drawn little by little from the university. It was also a town of amusements constant festivities permanent holidays and incessant revelry. Night and day the streets resounded with music song and the clinking of chalices and tankards for it is well known that nothing is such thirsty work as the acquisition of knowledge. Although the chancellors orders forbade students and tutors to drink and play before dusk drinking and playing took place around the clock in Oxenfurt for it is well known that if there is anything that makes men thirstier than the acquisition of knowledge it is the full or partial prohibition of drinking.
Dandilion smacked his lips at his bay gelding and rode on making his way through the crowds roaming the streets. Vendors stall-holders and travelling charlatans advertised their wares and services loudly adding to the confusion which reigned all around them.
Squid! Roast squid!
Ointment for all spotsnboils! Only sold here! Reliable miraculous ointment!
Cats mouse-catching magic cats! Just listen my good people how they miaow!
Amulets! Elixirs! Philtres love potions guaranteed aphrodisiacs! One pinch and even a corpse will regain its vigour! Wholl buy wholl buy?
Teeth extracted! Almost painless! Cheap very cheap!
What do you mean by cheap? Dandilion was curious as he bit into a stick-skewered squid as tough as a boot.
Two farthings an hour!
The poet shuddered and spurred his gelding on. He looked back surreptitiously. Two people who had been following in his tracks since the town hall stopped at the barber-shop pretending to ponder over the price of the barbers services displayed on a chalkboard. Dandilion did not let himself be deceived. He knew what really interested them.
He rode on. He passed the enormous building of the bawdy-house The Rosebud where he knew refined services either unknown or simply unpopular in other corners of the world were offered. For some time his rational mind struggled against his character and that desire to enter for an hour. Reason triumphed. Dandilion sighed and rode on towards the university trying not to look in the direction of the taprooms from which issued the sounds of merriment.
Yes what more can be said – the troubadour loved the town of Oxenfurt.
He looked around once more. The two individuals had not made use of the barbers services although they most certainly should have. At present they were standing outside a musical instrument shop pretending to ponder over the clay ocarinas. The shopkeeper was falling over himself praising his goods and counting on making some money. Dandilion knew there was nothing to count on.
He directed his horse towards the Philosophers Gate the main gate to the Academy. He dealt swiftly with the formalities which consisted of signing into a guest book and someone taking his gelding to the stables.
Beyond the Philosophers Gate a different world greeted him. The college land was excluded from the ordinary infrastructure of town buildings; unlike the town it was not a place of dogged struggle for every square yard of space. Everything here was practically as the elves had left it. Wide lanes – laid with colourful gravel – between neat eye-pleasing little palaces open-work fences walls hedges canals bridges flower-beds and green parks had been crushed in only a few places by some huge crude mansion constructed in later post-elven times. Everything was clean peaceful and dignified – any kind of trade or paid service was forbidden here not to mention entertainment or carnal pleasures.
Students absorbed in large books and parchments strolled along the lanes. Others sitting on benches lawns and in flower-beds repeated their homework to each other discussed or discreetly played at evens or odds leapfrog pile-up or other games demanding intelligence. Professors engrossed in conversation or debate also strolled here with dignity and decorum. Younger tutors milled around with their eyes glued to the backsides of female students. Dandilion ascertained with joy that since his day nothing had changed in the Academy.
A breeze swept in from the Delta carrying the faint scent of the sea and the somewhat stronger stink of hydrogen sulphide from the direction of the grand edifice of the Department of Alchemy which towered above the canal. Grey and yellow linnets warbled amongst the shrubs in the park adjacent to the students dormitories while an orang-utan sat in the poplar having no doubt escaped from the zoological gardens in the Department of Natural History.
Not wasting any time the poet marched briskly through the labyrinth of lanes and hedges. He knew the University grounds like the back of his hand – and no wonder considering he had studied there for four years then had lectured for a year in the Faculty of Trouvereship and Poetry. The post of lecturer had been offered to him when he had passed his final exams with full marks to the astonishment of professors with whom he had earned the reputation of lazybones rake and idiot during his studies. Then when after several years of roaming around the country with his lute his fame as a minstrel had spread far and wide the Academy had taken great pains to have him visit and give guest lectures. Dandilion yielded to their requests only sporadically for his love of wandering was constantly at odds with his predilection for comfort luxury and a regular income. And also of course with his liking for the town of Oxenfurt.
He looked back. The two individuals not having purchased any ocarinas pipes or violins strode behind him at a distance paying great attention to the treetops and façades.
Whistling lightheartedly the poet changed direction and made towards the mansion which housed the Faculty of Medicine and Herbology. The lane leading to the faculty swarmed with female students wearing characteristic pale green cloaks. Dandilion searched intently for familiar faces.
Shani!
A young medical student with dark red hair cropped just below her ears raised her head from a volume on anatomy and got up from her bench.
Dandilion! She smiled squinting her happy hazel eyes. I havent seen you for years! Come on Ill introduce you to my friends. They adore your poems—
Later muttered the bard. Look discreetly over there Shani. See those two?
Snoops. The medical student wrinkled her upturned nose and snorted amazing Dandilion – not for the first time – with how easily students could recognise secret agents spies and informers. Students aversion to the secret service was legendary if not very rational. The university grounds were extraterritorial and sacred and students and lecturers were untouchable while there – and the service although it snooped did not dare to bother or annoy academics.
Theyve been following me since the market place said Dandilion pretending to embrace and flirt with the medical student. Will you do something for me Shani?
Depends what. The girl tossed her shapely neck like a frightened deer. If youve got yourself into something stupid again…
No no he quickly reassured her. I only want to pass on some information and cant do it myself with these shits stuck to my heels—
Shall I call the lads? Ive only got to shout and youll have those snoops off your back.
Oh come on. You want a riot to break out? The row over the bench ghetto for non-humans has just about ended and you cant wait for more trouble? Besides I loathe violence. Ill manage the snoops. However if you could…
He brought his lips closer to the girls hair and took a while to whisper something. Shanis eyes opened wide.
A witcher? A real witcher?
Quiet for the love of gods. Will you do that Shani?
Of course. The medical student smiled readily. Just out of curiosity to see close up the famous—
Quieter I asked you. Only remember: not a word to anyone.
A physicians secret. Shani smiled even more beautifully and Dandilion was once more filled with the desire to finally compose a ballad about girls like her – not too pretty but nonetheless beautiful girls of whom one dreams at night when those of classical beauty are forgotten after five minutes.
Thank you Shani.
Its nothing Dandilion. See you later. Take care.
Duly kissing each others cheeks the bard and the medical student briskly moved off in opposite directions – she towards the faculty he towards Thinkers Park.
He passed the modern gloomy Faculty of Technology building dubbed the Deus ex machina by the students and turned on to Guildenstern Bridge. He did not get far. Two people lurked around a corner in the lane by the flowerbed with a bronze bust of the first chancellor of the Academy Nicodemus de Boot. As was the habit of all snoops in the world they avoided meeting others eyes and like all snoops in the world they had coarse pale faces. These they tried very hard to furnish with an intelligent expression thanks to which they resembled demented monkeys.
Greetings from Dijkstra said one of the spies. Were off.
Likewise the bard replied impudently. Off you go.
The spies looked at each other then rooted to the spot fixed their eyes on an obscene word which someone had scribbled in charcoal on the plinth supporting the chancellors bust. Dandilion sighed.
Just as I thought he said adjusting the lute on his shoulder. So am I going to be irrevocably forced to accompany you somewhere gentlemen? Too bad. Lets go then. You go first Ill follow. In this particular instance age may go before beauty.
Dijkstra head of King Vizimir of Redanias secret service did not resemble a spy. He was far from the stereotype which dictated that a spy should be short thin rat-like and have piercing eyes forever casting furtive glances from beneath a black hood. Dijkstra as Dandilion knew never wore hoods and had a decided preference for bright coloured clothing. He was almost seven foot tall and probably only weighed a little under two quintals. When he crossed his arms over his chest – which he did with habitual pleasure – it looked as if two cachalots had prostrated themselves over a whale. As far as his features hair colour and complexion were concerned he looked like a freshly scrubbed pig. Dandilion knew very few people whose appearance was as deceptive as Dijkstras – because this porky giant who gave the impression of being a sleepy sluggish moron possessed an exceptionally keen mind. And considerable authority. A popular saying at King Vizimirs court held that if Dijkstra states it is noon yet darkness reigns all around it is time to start worrying about the fate of the sun.
At present however the poet had other reasons to worry.
Dandilion said Dijkstra sleepily crossing the cachalots over the whale you thick-headed halfwit. You unmitigated dunce. Do you have to spoil everything you touch? Couldnt you just once in your life do something right? I know you cant think for yourself. I know youre almost forty look almost thirty think youre just over twenty and act as though youre barely ten. And being aware of this I usually furnish you with precise instructions. I tell you what you have to do when you have to do it and how youre to go about it. And I regularly get the impression that Im talking to a stone wall.
I on the other hand retorted the poet feigning insolence regularly have the impression that you talk simply to exercise your lips and tongue. So get to the point and eliminate the figures of speech and fruitless rhetoric. What are you getting at this time?
They were sitting at a large oak table amongst bookshelves crammed with volumes and piled with rolls of parchment on the top floor of the vice-chancellors offices in leased quarters which Dijkstra had amusingly named the Faculty of Most Contemporary History and Dandilion called the Faculty of Comparative Spying and Applied Sabotage. There were including the poet four present – apart from Dijkstra two other people took part in the conversation. One of these was as usual Ori Reuven the aged and eternally sniffing secretary to the chief of Redanian spies. The other was no ordinary person.
You know very well what Im getting at Dijkstra replied coldly. However since you clearly enjoy playing the idiot I wont spoil your game and will explain using simple words. Or maybe youd like to make use of this privilege Philippa?
Dandilion glanced at the fourth person present at the meeting who until then had remained silent. Philippa Eilhart must have only recently arrived in Oxenfurt or was perhaps intending to leave at once since she wore neither a dress nor her favourite black agate jewellery nor any sharp make-up. She was wearing a mans short jacket leggings and high boots – a field outfit as the poet called it. The enchantresss dark hair usually loose and worn in a picturesque mess was brushed smooth and tied back at the nape of her neck.
Lets not waste time she said raising her even eyebrows. Dandilions right. We can spare ourselves the rhetoric and slick eloquence which leads nowhere when the matter at hand is so simple and trivial.
Ah even so. Dijkstra smiled. Trivial. A dangerous Nilfgaardian agent who could now be trivially locked away in my deepest dungeon in Tretogor has trivially escaped trivially warned and frightened away by the trivial stupidity of two gentlemen known as Dandilion and Geralt. Ive seen people wander to the scaffolds over lesser trivialities. Why didnt you inform me about your ambush Dandilion? Did I not instruct you to keep me informed about all the witchers intentions?
I didnt know anything about Geralts plans Dandilion lied with conviction. I told you that he went to Temeria and Sodden to hunt down this Rience. I also told you that he had returned. I was convinced he had given up. Rience had literally dissolved into thin air the witcher didnt find the slightest trail and this – if you remember – I also told you—
You lied stated the spy coldly. The witcher did find Riences trail. In the form of corpses. Thats when he decided to change his tactics. Instead of chasing Rience he decided to wait for Rience to find him. He signed up to the Malatius and Grock Company barges as an escort. He did so intentionally. He knew that the Company would advertise it far and wide that Rience would hear of it and then venture to try something. And so Rience did. The strange elusive Master Rience. The insolent self-assured Master Rience who does not even bother to use aliases or false names. Master Rience who from a mile off smells of Nilfgaardian chimney smoke. And of being a renegade sorcerer. Isnt that right Philippa?
The magician neither affirmed nor denied it. She remained silent watching Dandilion closely and intently. The poet lowered his eyes and hawked hesitantly. He did not like such gazes.
Dandilion divided women – including magicians – into very likeable likeable unlikeable and very unlikeable. The very likeable reacted to the proposition of being bedded with joyful acquiescence the likeable with a happy smile. The unlikeable reacted unpredictably. The very unlikeable were counted by the troubadour to be those to whom the very thought of presenting such a proposition made his back go strangely cold and his knees shake.
Philippa Eilhart although very attractive was decidedly very unlikeable.
Apart from that Philippa Eilhart was an important figure in the Council of Wizards and King Vizimirs trusted court magician. She was a very talented enchantress. Word had it that she was one of the few to have mastered the art of polymorphy. She looked thirty. In truth she was probably no less than three hundred years old.
Dijkstra locking his chubby fingers together over his belly twiddled his thumbs. Philippa remained silent. Ori Reuven coughed sniffed and wriggled constantly adjusting his generous toga. His toga resembled a professors but did not look as if it had been presented by a senate. It looked more as if it had been found on a rubbish heap.
Your witcher however suddenly snarled the spy underestimated Master Rience. He set a trap but – demonstrating a complete lack of common sense – banked on Rience troubling himself to come in person. Rience according to the witchers plan was to feel safe. Rience wasnt to smell a trap anywhere wasnt to spy Master Dijkstras subordinates lying in wait for him. Because on the witchers instructions Master Dandilion had not squealed to Master Dijkstra about the planned ambush. But according to the instructions received Master Dandilion was duty bound to do so. Master Dandilion had clear explicit instructions in this matter which he deigned to ignore.
I am not one of your subordinates. The poet puffed up with pride. And I dont have to comply with your instructions and orders. I help you sometimes but I do so out of my own free will from patriotic duty so as not to stand by idly in face of the approaching changes—
You spy for anyone who pays you Dijkstra interrupted coldly. You inform on anyone who has something on you. And Ive got a few pretty good things on you Dandilion. So dont be saucy.
I wont give in to blackmail!
Shall we bet on it?
Gentlemen. Philippa Eilhart raised her hand. Lets be serious if you please. Lets not be diverted from the matter in hand.
Quite right. The spy sprawled out in the armchair. Listen poet. Whats done is done. Rience has been warned and wont be duped a second time. But I cant let anything like this happen in the future. Thats why I want to see the witcher. Bring him to me. Stop wandering around town trying to lose my agents. Go straight to Geralt and bring him here to the faculty. I have to talk to him. Personally and without witnesses. Without the noise and publicity which would arise if I were to arrest the witcher. Bring him to me Dandilion. Thats all I require of you at present.
Geralt has left the bard lied calmly. Dijkstra glanced at the magician. Dandilion expecting an impulse to sound out his mind tensed but he did not feel anything. Philippa was watching him her eyes narrowed but nothing indicated that she was using spells to verify his truthfulness.
Then Ill wait until hes back sighed Dijkstra pretending to believe him. The matter I want to see him about is important so Ill make some changes to my schedule and wait for the witcher. When hes back bring him here. The sooner the better. Better for many people.
There might be a few difficulties Dandilion grimaced in convincing Geralt to come here. He – just imagine it – harbours an inexplicable aversion to spies. Although to all intents and purposes he seems to understand it is a job like any other he feels repulsion for those who execute it. Patriotic reasons hes wont to say are one thing but the spying profession attracts only out-and-out scoundrels and the lowest—
Enough enough. Dijkstra waved his hand carelessly. No platitudes please platitudes bore me. Theyre so crude.
I think so too snorted the troubadour. But the witchers a simple soul a straightforward honest simpleton in his judgement nothing like us men-of-the-world. He simply despises spies and wont want to talk to you for anything in the world and as for helping the secret services theres no question about it. And you havent got anything on him.
Youre mistaken said the spy. I do. More than one thing. But for the time being that brawl on the barge near Acorn Bay is enough. You know who those men who came on board were? They werent Riences men.
Thats not news to me said the poet casually. Im sure they were a few scoundrels of the likes of which there is no shortage in the Temerian Guards. Rience has been asking about the witcher and no doubt offering a nice sum for any news about him. Its obvious that the witcher is very important to him. So a few crafty dogs tried to grab Geralt bury him in some cave and then sell him to Rience dictating their conditions and trying to bargain as much out of him as possible. Because they would have got very little if anything at all for mere information.
My congratulations on such perspicacity. The witchers of course not yours – it would never have occurred to you. But the matter is more complex than you think. My colleagues men belonging to King Foltests secret service are also as it turns out interested in Master Rience. They saw through the plan of those – as you called them – crafty dogs. It is they who boarded the barge they who wanted to grab the witcher. Perhaps as bait for Rience perhaps for a different end. At Acorn Bay Dandilion the witcher killed Temerian agents. Their chief is very very angry. You say Geralt has left? I hope he hasnt gone to Temeria. He might never return.
And thats what you have on him?
Indeed. Thats what I have. I can pacify the Temerians. But not for nothing. Where has the witcher gone Dandilion?
Novigrad the troubadour lied without thinking. He went to look for Rience there.
A mistake a mistake smiled the spy pretending not to have caught the lie. You see what a shame it is he didnt overcome his repulsion and get in touch with me. Id have saved him the effort. Rience isnt in Novigrad. Whereas theres no end of Temerian agents there. Probably all waiting for the witcher. Theyve caught on to something Ive known for a long time. Namely that Geralt the witcher from Rivia can answer all kinds of questions if hes asked in the right manner. Questions which the secret services of each of the Four Kingdoms are beginning to ask themselves. The arrangement is simple: the witcher comes here to the department and gives me the answers to these questions. And hell be left in peace. Ill calm the Temerians and guarantee his safety.
What questions are you talking about? Maybe I can answer them?
Dont make me laugh Dandilion.
Yet Philippa Eilhart said suddenly perhaps he can? Maybe he can save us time? Dont forget Dijkstra our poet is mixed up to his ears in this affair and weve got him here but we havent got the witcher. Where is the child seen with Geralt in Kaedwen? The girl with ashen hair and green eyes? The one Rience asked you about back in Temeria when he caught and tortured you? Eh Dandilion? What do you know about the girl? Where has the witcher hidden her? Where did Yennefer go when she received Geralts letter? Where is Triss Merigold hiding and why is she hiding?
Dijkstra did not stir but his swift glance at the magician showed Dandilion that the spy was taken aback. The questions Philippa had raised had clearly been asked too soon. And directed to the wrong person. The questions appeared rash and careless. The trouble was that Philippa Eilhart could be accused of anything but rashness and carelessness.
Im very sorry he said slowly but I dont know the answer to any of the questions. Id help you if I could. But I cant.
Philippa looked him straight in the eyes.
Dandilion she drawled. If you know where that girl is tell us. I assure you that all that I and Dijkstra care about is her safety. Safety which is being threatened.
I have no doubt lied the poet thats all you care about. But I really dont know what youre talking about. Ive never seen the child youre so interested in. And Geralt—
Geralt interrupted Dijkstra never confided in you never said a word even though no doubt you inundated him with questions. Why do you think that might be Dandilion? Could it be that this simple soul this simpleton who despises spies sensed who you really are? Leave him alone Philippa its a waste of time. He knows shit-all dont be taken in by his cocksure expressions and ambiguous smirks. He can help us in only one way. When the witcher emerges from his hide-out hell get in touch with him no one else. Just imagine he considers him to be a friend.
Dandilion slowly raised his head.
Indeed he confirmed. He considers me to be such. And just imagine Dijkstra that its not without reason. Finally accept the fact and draw your conclusions. Have you drawn them? Right so now you can try blackmail.
Well well smiled the spy. How touchy you are on that point. But dont sulk poet. I was joking. Blackmail between us comrades? Out of the question. And believe me I dont wish that witcher of yours any ill nor am I thinking of harming him. Who knows – maybe Ill even come to some understanding with him to the advantage of us both? But in order for that to happen Ive got to see him. When he appears bring him to me. I ask you sincerely Dandilion very sincerely. Have you understood how sincerely?
The troubadour snorted. Ive understood how sincerely.
Id like to believe thats true. Well go now. Ori show our troubadour to the door.
Take care. Dandilion got to his feet. I wish you luck in your work and your personal life. My regards Philippa. Oh and Dijkstra! Those agents traipsing after me. Call them off.
Of course lied the spy. Ill call them off. Is it possible you dont believe me?
Nothing of the kind lied the poet. I believe you.
Dandilion stayed on the Academy premises until evening. He kept looking around attentively but didnt spot any snoops following him. And that was precisely what worried him most.
At the Faculty of Trouvereship he listened to a lecture on classical poetry. Then he slept sweetly through a seminar on modern poetry. He was woken up by some tutors he knew and together they went to the Department of Philosophy to take part in a long-enduring stormy dispute on The essence and origins of life. Before it had even grown dark half of the participants were outright drunk while the rest were preparing for blows out-shouting each other and creating a hullabaloo hard to describe. All this proved handy for the poet.
He slipped unseen into the garret clambered out by the window vent slid down by way of the gutter onto the roof of the library and – nearly breaking his leg – jumped across onto the roof of the dissecting theatre. From there he got into the garden adjacent to the wall. Amidst the dense gooseberry bushes he found a hole which he himself had made bigger when a student. Beyond the hole lay the town of Oxenfurt.
He merged into the crowd then quickly sneaked down the backstreets dodging like a hare chased by hounds. When he reached the coach house he waited a good half hour hidden in the shadows. Not spotting anything suspicious he climbed the ladder to the thatch and leaped onto the roof of the house belonging to Wolfgang Amadeus Goatbeard a brewer he knew. Gripping the moss-covered roof tiles he finally arrived at the window of the attic he was aiming for. An oil lamp was burning inside the little room. Perched precariously on the guttering Dandilion knocked on the lead frames. The window was not locked and gave way at the slightest push.
Geralt! Hey Geralt!
Dandilion? Wait… Dont come in please…
Whats that dont come in? What do you mean dont come in? The poet pushed the window. Youre not alone or what? Are you bedding someone right now?
Neither receiving nor waiting for an answer he clambered onto the sill knocking over the apples and onions lying on it.
Geralt… he panted and immediately fell silent. Then cursed under his breath staring at the light green robes of a medical student strewn across the floor. He opened his mouth in astonishment and cursed once more. He could have expected anything. But not this.
Shani. He shook his head. May the—
No comments thank you very much. The witcher sat down on the bed. And Shani covered herself yanking the sheet right up to her upturned nose.
Well come in then. Geralt reached for his trousers. Since youre coming by way of the window this must be important. Because if it isnt Im going to throw you straight back out through it.
Dandilion clambered off the sill knocking down the rest of the onions. He sat down pulling the high-backed wooden chair closer with his foot. The witcher gathered Shanis clothes and his own from the floor. He looked abashed and dressed in silence. The medical student hiding behind him was struggling with her shirt. The poet watched her insolently searching in his mind for similes and rhymes for the golden colour of her skin in the light of the oil lamp and the curves of her small breasts.
Whats this about Dandilion? The witcher fastened the buckles on his boots. Go on.
Pack your bags he replied dryly. Your departure is imminent.
How imminent?
Exceptionally.
Shani… Geralt cleared his throat. Shani told me about the snoops following you. You lost them I understand?
You dont understand anything.
Rience?
Worse.
In that case I really dont understand… Wait. The Redanians? Tretogor? Dijkstra?
Youve guessed.
Thats still no reason—
Its reason enough interrupted Dandilion. Theyre not concerned about Rience any more Geralt. Theyre after the girl and Yennefer. Dijkstra wants to know where they are. Hes going to force you to disclose it to him. Do you understand now?
I do now. And so were fleeing. Does it have to be through the window?
Absolutely. Shani? Will you manage?
The student of medicine smoothed down her robe.
It wont be my first window.
I was sure of that. The poet scrutinised her intently counting on seeing a blush worthy of rhyme and metaphor. He miscalculated. Mirth in her hazel eyes and an impudent smile were all he saw.
A big grey owl glided down to the sill without a sound. Shani cried out quietly. Geralt reached for his sword.
Dont be silly Philippa said Dandilion.
The owl disappeared and Philippa Eilhart appeared in its place squatting awkwardly. The magician immediately jumped into the room smoothing down her hair and clothes.
Good evening she said coldly. Introduce me Dandilion.
Geralt of Rivia. Shani of Medicine. And that owl which so craftily flew in my tracks is no owl. This is Philippa Eilhart from the Council of Wizards at present in King Vizimirs service and pride of the Tretogor court. Its a shame weve only got one chair in here.
Its quite enough. The enchantress made herself comfortable in the high-backed chair vacated by Dandilion and cast a smouldering glance over those present fixing her eyes somewhat longer on Shani. The medical student to Dandilions surprise suddenly blushed.
In principle what Ive come about is the sole concern of Geralt of Rivia Philippa began after a short pause. Im aware however that to ask anybody to leave would be tactless and so…
I can leave said Shani hesitantly.
You cant muttered Geralt. No one can until the situations made clear. Isnt that so my lady?
Philippa to you smiled the enchantress. Lets throw formalities aside. And no one has to go – no ones presence bothers me. Astonishes me at most but what to do? – life is an endless train of surprises… as one of my friends says… As our mutual friend says Geralt. Youre studying medicine are you Shani? What year?
Third grunted the girl.
Ah Philippa Eilhart was looking not at her but at the witcher seventeen what a beautiful age. Yennefer would give a lot to be that age again. What do you reckon Geralt? Because Ill ask her when I get the chance.
The witcher smiled nastily.
Ive no doubt you will ask. Ive no doubt youll follow the question with a commentary. Ive no doubt itll amuse you no end. Now come to the point please.
Quite right. The magician nodded growing serious. Its high time. And you havent got much time. Dandilion has no doubt already informed you that Dijkstra has suddenly acquired the wish to see and talk to you to establish the location of a certain girl. Dijkstra has orders from King Vizimir in this matter and so I think he will be very insistent that you reveal this place to him.
Of course. Thank you for the warning. Only one thing puzzles me a little. You say Dijkstra received instructions from the king. And you didnt receive any? After all you hold a prominent seat in Vizimirs council.
Indeed. The magician was not perturbed by the gibe. I do. I take my responsibilities seriously and they consist of warning the king against making mistakes. Sometimes – as in this particular instance – I am not allowed to tell the king outright that he is committing a mistake or to dissuade him from a hasty action. I simply have to render it impossible for him to make a mistake. You understand what Im saying?
The witcher confirmed with a nod. Dandilion wondered whether he really did understand because he knew that Philippa was lying through her teeth.
So I see said Geralt slowly proving that he understood perfectly well that the Council of Wizards is also interested in my ward. The wizards wish to find out where my ward is. And they want to get to her before Vizimir or anybody else does. Why Philippa? What is it about my ward? What makes her so very interesting?
The magicians eyes narrowed. Dont you know? she hissed. Do you know so little about her? I wouldnt like to draw any hasty conclusions but such a lack of knowledge would indicate that your qualifications as her guardian amount to nothing. In truth Im surprised that being so unaware and so lacking in information you decided to look after her. And not only that – you decided to deny the right to look after her to others others who have both the qualifications and the right. And on top of that you ask why? Careful Geralt or your arrogance will be the end of you. Watch out. And guard that child damn it! Guard that girl as though shes the apple of your eye! And if you cant do so yourself ask others to!
For a moment Dandilion thought the witcher was going to mention the role undertaken by Yennefer. He would not be risking anything and would flatten Philippas arguments. But Geralt said nothing. The poet guessed why. Philippa knew everything. Philippa was warning him. And the witcher understood her warning.
He concentrated on observing their eyes and faces wondering whether by any chance something in the past had tied the two together. Dandilion knew that similar duels of words and allusions – demonstrating a mutual fascination – waged between the witcher and enchantresses very often ended in bed. But observation as usual gave him nothing. There was only one way to find out whether something had tied the witcher to anyone – one had to enter through the window at the appropriate moment.
To look after someone the enchantress continued after a while means to take upon oneself the responsibility for the safety of a person unable to assure that safety for herself. If you expose your ward… If she comes to any misfortune the responsibility falls on you Geralt. Only you.
I know.
Im afraid you still know too little.
So enlighten me. What makes so many people suddenly want to free me from the burden of that responsibility want to take on my duties and care for my ward? What does the Council of Wizards want from Ciri? What do Dijkstra and King Vizimir want from her? What do the Temerians want from her? What does a certain Rience who has already murdered three people in Sodden and Temeria who were in touch with me and the girl two years ago want from her? Who almost murdered Dandilion trying to extract information about her? Who is this Rience Philippa?
I dont know said the magician. I dont know who Rience is. But like you Id very much like to find out.
Does this Rience – Shani unexpectedly – have a third-degree burn on his face? If so then I know who he is. And I know where he is.
In the silence which fell the first drops of rain knocked on the gutter outside the window.
Murder is always murder regardless of motive or circumstance. Thus those who murder or who prepare to murder are malefactors and criminals regardless of who they may be: kings princes marshals or judges. None who contemplates and commits violence has the right to consider himself better than an ordinary criminal. Because it is in the nature of all violence to lead inevitably to crime.
Nicodemus de Boot Meditations on Life Happiness and Prosperity
CHAPTER SIX
Let us not commit a mistake said Vizimir King of Redania sliding his ringed fingers through the hair at his temples. We cant afford to make a blunder or mistake now.
Those assembled said nothing. Demawend ruler of Aedirn sprawled in his armchair staring at the tankard of beer resting on his belly. Foltest the Lord of Temeria Pontar Mahakam and Sodden and recently Senior Protector of Brugge presented his noble profile to everyone by turning his head towards the window. At the opposite side of the table sat Henselt King of Kaedwen running his small piercing eyes – glistening from a face as bearded as a brigands – over the other participants of the council. Meve Queen of Lyria toyed pensively with the enormous rubies in her necklace occasionally twisting her beautiful full lips into an ambiguous grimace.
Let us not commit a mistake repeated Vizimir because a mistake could cost us too much. Let us make use of the experience of others. When our ancestors landed on the beaches five hundred years ago the elves also hid their heads in the sand. We tore the country away from them piece by piece and they retreated thinking all the while that this would be the last border that we would encroach no further. Let us be wiser! Because now it is our turn. Now we are the elves. Nilfgaard is at the Yaruga and I hear: So let them stay there. I hear: They wont come any further. But they will youll see. So I repeat let us not make the same mistake as the elves!
Raindrops knocked against the window panes and the wind howled eerily. Queen Meve raised her head. She thought she heard the croaking of ravens and crows but it was only the wind. The wind and rain.
Do not compare us to the elves said Henselt of Kaedwen. You dishonour us with such a comparison. The elves did not know how to fight – they retreated before our ancestors and hid in the mountains and forests. The elves did not treat our ancestors to a Sodden. But we showed the Nilfgaardians what it means to pick a quarrel with us. Do not threaten us with Nilfgaard Vizimir dont sow the seeds of propaganda. Nilfgaard you say is at the Yaruga? I say that Nilfgaard is sitting as quiet as a church mouse beyond the river. Because we broke their spine at Sodden. We broke them militarily and above all we broke their morale. I dont know whether it is true that Emhyr var Emreis was at the time against aggression on such a scale that the attack on Cintra was the work of some party hostile to him – I take it that if they had defeated us he would be applauding and distributing privileges and endowments amongst them. But after Sodden it suddenly turns out he was against it and that everything which occurred was due to his marshals insubordination. And heads fell. The scaffolds flowed with blood. These are certain facts not rumours. Eight solemn executions and many more modest ones. Several apparently natural yet mysterious deaths a good many cases of people suddenly choosing to retire. I tell you Emhyr fell into a rage and practically finished off his own commanders. So who will lead their army now? The sergeants?
No not the sergeants said Demawend of Aedirn coldly. It will be young and gifted officers who have long waited for such an opportunity and have been trained by Emhyr for an equally long time. Those whom the older marshals stopped from taking command prevented from being promoted. The young gifted commanders about whom we already hear. Those who crushed the uprisings in Metinna and Nazair who rapidly broke up the rebels in Ebbing. Commanders who appreciate the roles of out-flanking manoeuvres of far-reaching cavalry raids of swift infantry marches and of landing operations from the sea. They use the tactics of crushing assaults in specific directions they use the newest siege techniques instead of relying on the uncertainties of magic. They must not be underestimated. They are itching to cross the Yaruga and prove that they have learned from the mistakes of their old marshals.
If they have truly learned anything Henselt shrugged they will not cross the Yaruga. The river estuary on the border between Cintra and Verden is still controlled by Ervyll and his three strongholds: Nastrog Rozrog and Bodrog. They cannot be seized just like that – no new technology is going to help them there. Our flank is defended by Ethain of Cidariss fleet and thanks to it we control the shore. And also thanks to the pirates of Skellige. Jarl Crach an Craite if you remember didnt sign a truce with Nilfgaard and regularly bites them attacking and setting fire to their maritime settlements and forts in the Provinces. The Nilfgaardians have nicknamed him Tirth ys Muire Sea Boar. They frighten children with him!
Frightening Nilfgaardian children smiled Vizimir wryly will not ensure our safety.
No agreed Henselt. Something else will. Without control of the estuary or the shore and with a flank exposed Emhyr var Emreis will be in no position to ensure provisions reach any detachments he might care to send across the Yaruga. What swift marches what cavalry raids? Ridiculous. The army will come to a standstill within three days of crossing the river. Half will lay siege to the stronghold and the rest will be slowly dispersed to plunder the region in search of fodder and food. And when their famed cavalry has eaten most of its own horses well give them another Sodden. Damn it Id like them to cross the river! But dont worry they wont.
Let us say Meve of Lyria said suddenly that they do not cross the Yaruga. Let us say that Nilfgaard will simply wait. Now let us consider: who would that suit them or us? Who can let themselves wait and do nothing and who cant?
Exactly! picked up Vizimir. Meve as usual does not say much but she hits the nail on the head. Emhyr has time on his hands gentlemen but we dont. Cant you see what is happening? Three years ago Nilfgaard disturbed a small stone on the mountainside and now they are calmly waiting for an avalanche. They can simply wait while new stones keep pouring down the slope. Because to some that first small stone looked like a boulder which would be impossible to move. And since it turned out that a mere touch sufficed to set it rolling others appeared for whom an avalanche would prove convenient. From the Grey Mountains to Bremervoord elven commandos rove the forests – this is no longer a small group of guerrilla fighters this is war. Just wait and well see the free elves of Dol Blathanna rising to fight. In Mahakam the dwarves are rebelling the dryads of Brokilon are growing bolder and bolder. This is war war on a grand scale. Civil war. Domestic. Our own. While Nilfgaard waits… Whose side you think time is on? The Scoiatael commandos have thirty- or forty-year old elves fighting for them. And they live for three hundred years! They have time we dont!
The Scoiatael admitted Henselt have become a real thorn in the backside. Theyre paralysing my trade and transport terrorising the farmers… we have to put an end to this!
If the non-humans want war they will get it threw in Foltest of Temeria. I have always been an advocate of mutual agreement and co-existence but if they prefer a test of strength then we will see who is the stronger. I am ready. I undertake to put an end to the Squirrels in Temeria and Sodden within six months. Those lands have already run with elven blood once shed by our ancestors. I consider the blood-letting a tragedy but I do not see an alternative – the tragedy will be repeated. The elves have to be pacified.
Your army will march against the elves if you give the order nodded Demawend. But will it march against humans? Against the peasantry from which you muster your infantry? Against the guilds? Against the free towns? Speaking of the Scoiatael Vizimir described only one stone in the avalanche. Yes yes gentlemen do not gape at me like that! Word is already going round the villages and towns that on the lands already taken by the Nilfgaard peasants farmers and craftsmen are having an easier life freer and richer and that merchants guilds have more privileges… We are inundated with goods from Nilfgaardian manufactories. In Brugge and Verden their coin is ousting local currency. If we sit and do nothing we will be finished at odds with our neighbours embroiled in conflict tangled up in trying to quell rebellions and riots and slowly subdued by the economic strength of the Nilfgaardians. We will be finished suffocating in our own stuffy parochial corner because – understand this – Nilfgaard is cutting off our route to the South and we have to develop we have to be expansive otherwise there wont be enough room here for our grandchildren!
Those gathered said nothing. Vizimir of Redania sighed deeply grabbed one of the chalices standing on the table and took a long draught. Rain battered against the windows throughout the prolonged silence and the wind howled and pounded against the shutters.
All the worries of which we talk said Henselt finally are the work of Nilfgaard. It is Emhyrs emissaries who are inciting the non-humans spreading propaganda and calling for riots. It is they who are throwing gold around and promising privileges to corporations and guilds assuring barons and dukes they will receive high positions in the provinces they plan to create in place of our kingdoms. I dont know what its like in your countries but in Kaedwen weve been inundated with clerics preachers fortune-tellers and other shitty mystics all appearing out of the blue all preaching the end of the world…
Its the same in my country agreed Foltest. Damn it for so many years there was peace. Ever since my grandfather showed the clerics their place and decimated their ranks those who remained stuck to useful tasks. They studied books and instilled knowledge in children treated the sick took care of the poor the handicapped and the homeless. They didnt get mixed up in politics. And now all of a sudden theyve woken up and are yelling nonsense to the rabble – and the rabble is listening and believes they know at last why their lives are so hard. I put up with it because Im less impetuous than my grandfather and less sensitive about my royal authority and dignity than he was. What sort of dignity or authority would it be anyway if it could be undermined by the squealings of some deranged fanatic? But my patience is coming to an end. Recently the main topic of preaching has been of a Saviour who will come from the south. From the south! From beyond the Yaruga!
The White Flame muttered Demawend. White Chill will come to be and after it the White Light. And then the world will be reborn through the White Flame and the White Queen… Ive heard it too. Its a travesty of the prophecy of Ithlinne aep Aevenien the elven seeress. I gave orders to catch one cleric who was going on about it in the Vengerberg market place and the torturer asked him politely and at length how much gold the prophet had received from Emhyr for doing it… But the preacher only prattled on about the White Flame and the White Queen… the same thing to the very end.
Careful Demawend grimaced Vizimir. Dont make any martyrs. Thats exactly what Emhyr is after. Catch all the Nilfgaardian agents you please but do not lay hands on clerics the consequences are too unpredictable. They still are held in regard and have an important influence on people. We have too much trouble with the Squirrels to risk riots in our towns or war against our own peasants.
Damn it! snorted Foltest lets not do this lets not risk that we mustnt this we mustnt that… Have we gathered here to talk about all we cant do? Is that why you dragged us all to Hagge Demawend to cry our hearts out and bemoan our weakness and helplessness? Let us finally do something! Something must be done! What is happening has to be stopped!
Ive been saying that from the start. Vizimir pulled himself up. I propose action.
What sort of action?
What can we do?
Silence fell again. The wind blustered the shutters banged against the castle wall.
Why said Meve suddenly are you all looking at me?
Were admiring your beauty Henselt mumbled from the depths of his tankard.
That too seconded Vizimir. Meve we all know you can find a solution to everything. You have a womans intuition youre a wise wo—
Stop flattering me. The Queen of Lyria clasped her hands in her lap and fixed her gaze on the darkened tapestries with their depictions of hunting scenes. Hounds extended in a leap were turning their muzzles up towards the flanks of a fleeing white unicorn. Ive never seen a live unicorn thought Meve. Never. And I probably never will.
The situation in which we find ourselves she said after a while tearing her eyes away from the tapestry reminds me of long winter evenings in Rivian Castle. Something always hung in the air. My husband would be contemplating how to get his hands on yet another maid-of-honour. The marshal would be working out how to start a war which would make him famous. The wizard would imagine he was king. The servants wouldnt feel like serving the jester would be sad gloomy and excruciatingly dull the dogs would howl with melancholy and the cats sleep careless of any mice that might be scuttling around on the table. Everybody was waiting for something. Everyone was scowling at me. And I… then I… I showed them. I showed them all what I was capable of in a way that made the very walls shake and the local grizzly bears wake in their winter lairs. And any silly thoughts disappeared from their heads in a trice. Suddenly everyone knew who ruled.
No one uttered a word. The wind howled a little louder. The guards on the buttresses outside hailed each other casually. The patter of drops on the panes in the lead window frames grew to a frenzied staccato.
Nilfgaard is watching and waiting continued Meve slowly toying with her necklace. Nilfgaard is observing us. Something is hanging in the air silly thoughts are springing up in many heads. So let us show them what we are capable of. Let us show them who is really king here. Let us shake the walls of this great castle plunged into a winter torpor!
Eradicate the Squirrels said Henselt quickly. Start a huge joint military operation. Treat the non-humans to a blood bath. Let the Pontar Gwenllech and Buina flow with elven blood from source to estuary!
Send a penal expedition to smother the free elves of Dol Blathanna added Demawend frowning. March an interventionary force into Mahakam. Allow Ervyll of Verden a chance at last to get at the dryads in Brokilon. Yes a blood bath! And any survivors – to the reservations!
Set Crach an Craite at the Nilfgaardian shores picked up Vizimir. Support him with Ethain of Cidariss fleet let them go ravaging from the Yaruga to Ebbing! A show of strength—
Not enough. Foltest shook his head. All of that is still not enough. We need… I know what we need.
So tell us!
Cintra.
What?
To take Cintra back from the Nilfgaardians. Let us cross the Yaruga be the first to attack. Now while they dont expect it. Let us throw them out back beyond the Marnadal.
How? Weve just said that its impossible for an army to cross the Yaruga—
Impossible for Nilfgaard. But we have control of the river. We hold the estuary in our grasp and the supply routes and our flank is protected by Skellige Cidaris and the strongholds in Verden. For Nilfgaard getting forty or fifty thousand men across the river is a considerable effort. We can get far more across to the left bank. Dont gape Vizimir. You wanted something to put an end to the waiting? Something spectacular? Something which will make us true kings again? That something is Cintra. Cintra will bind us and our rule together because Cintra is a symbol. Remember Sodden! If it were not for the massacre of that town and Calanthes martyrdom there would not have been such a victory then. The forces were equal – no one counted on our crushing them like that. But our armies threw themselves at their throats like wolves like rabid dogs to avenge the Lioness of Cintra. And there are those whose fury was not quelled by the blood spilt on the field of Sodden. Remember Crach an Craite the Wild Boar of the Sea!
That is true nodded Demawend. Crach swore bloody vengeance on Nilfgaard. For Eist Tuirseach killed at Marnadal. And for Calanthe. If we were to strike at the left bank Crach would back us up with all the strength of Skellige. By the gods this has a chance at success! I back Foltest! Let us not wait let us strike first let us liberate Cintra and chase those sons-of-bitches beyond the Amell pass!
Slow down snarled Henselt. Dont be in such a hurry to tug the lions whiskers because this lion is not dead yet. That is for starters. Secondly if we are the first to strike we will put ourselves in the position of aggressors. We will be breaking the truce to which we all put our seals. We will not be backed by Niedamir and his League we will not be backed by Esterad Thyssen. I dont know how Ethain of Cidaris will react. An aggressive war will also be opposed by our guilds merchants nobles… And above all the wizards. Do not forget the wizards!
The wizards wont back an assault on the left bank confirmed Vizimir. The peace agreement was the work of Vilgefortz of Roggeveen. It is well known that his plan was for the armistice to gradually turn into permanent peace. Vilgefortz will not back a war. And the Chapter believe me will do whatever Vilgefortz wishes. After Sodden he has become the most important person in the Chapter – let other magicians say what they will Vilgefortz plays first fiddle there.
Vilgefortz Vilgefortz bridled Foltest. He has grown too large for us that magician. Taking into account Vilgefortzs and the Chapters plans – plans which I am not acquainted with anyway and which I do not understand at that – is beginning to annoy me. But there is a way around that too gentlemen. What if it were Nilfgaard who was the aggressor? At Dol Angra for example? Against Aedirn and Lyria? We could arrange that somehow… could stage some tiny provocation… A border incident caused by them? An attack on a border fort let us say? We will of course be prepared – we will react decisively and forcefully with everybodys full acceptance including that of Vilgefortz and the entire Chapter of Wizards. And when Emhyr var Emreis turns his eyes from Sodden and Transriver the Cintrians will demand their country back – all those the emigrants and refugees who are gathering themselves in Brugge under Vissegerds leadership. Nearly eight thousand of them are armed. Could there be a better spearhead? They live in the hope of regaining the country they were forced to flee. They are burning to fight. They are ready to strike the left bank. They await only the battle cry.
The battle cry bore out Meve and the promise that we will back them up. Because Emhyr can command eight thousand men at his border garrison; with that strength he wont even have to send for relief troops. Vissegerd knows this very well and wont move until he has the assurance that your armies Foltest reinforced by Redanian corps will disembark on the left bank at his heels. But above all Vissegerd is waiting for the Lion Cub of Cintra. Apparently the queens granddaughter survived the slaughter. Allegedly she was seen amongst the refugees but the child mysteriously disappeared. The emigrants persist in their search for her… Because they need someone of royal blood to sit on their regained throne. Someone of Calanthes blood.
Nonsense said Foltest coldly. More than two years have passed. If the child has not been found by now shes dead. We can forget that myth. Calanthe is no more and there is no Lion Cub no royal blood to whom the throne belongs. Cintra… will never again be what it was during the Lionesss lifetime. Obviously we cannot say that to Vissegerds emigrants.
So you are going to send Cintrian guerrillas to their deaths? Meve narrowed her eyes. In the line of attack? Not telling them that Cintra can only be reborn as a vassal country under your protectorship? You are proposing to all of us an attack on Cintra for your own gain? You have suborned Sodden and Brugge for yourself are sharpening your teeth on Verden and now you have caught a whiff of Cintra is that right?
Admit it Foltest snapped Henselt. Is Meve right? Is that why you are inciting us to this affair?
Come on leave it. The ruler of Temeria furrowed his noble brow and bristled angrily. Dont make me out as some conqueror dreaming of an empire. What are you talking about? Sodden and Brugge? Ekkehard of Sodden was my mothers half-brother. Are you surprised that following his death the Free States brought the crown to me his relative? Blood not water! And yes Venzlav of Brugge paid me homage as a vassal – but without coercion! He did it to protect his country because on a fine day he can see Nilfgaardian lances flashing on the left bank of the Yaruga!
And we are talking about the left bank drawled out the Queen of Lyria. The bank we are to strike. And the left bank is Cintra. Destroyed burned out ruined decimated and occupied… but still Cintra. The Cintrians wont bring you their crown Foltest nor will they pay you homage. Cintra will not agree to be a vassal state. Blood not water!
Cintra if we… When we liberate it it should become our joint protectorate said Demawend of Aedirn. Cintra is at the mouth of the Yaruga in too important a strategic position to allow ourselves to lose control over it.
It has to be a free country objected Vizimir. Free independent and strong. A country which will be an iron gateway a bulwark to the north and not a strip of burned ground over which the Nilfgaardian cavalry will be able to gather speed!
Is it possible to rebuild such a Cintra? Without Calanthe?
Dont get all worked up Foltest pouted Meve. Ive already told you the Cintrians will never accept a protectorate or foreign blood on their throne. If you try to force yourself on them as their lord the tables will be turned. Vissegerd will again prepare his troops for battle but this time under Emhyrs wings. And one day those detachments are going to assail us in the vanguard of a Nilfgaardian onslaught. As the spear point as you just vividly described it.
Foltest knows that snorted Vizimir. Thats why hes searching so hard for this Lion Cub for Calanthes granddaughter. Dont you understand? Blood not water the crown through marriage. Its enough for him to find the girl and force her to marry—
Are you out of your mind? choked out the King of Temeria. The Lion Cub is dead! Im not looking for the girl at all but if I were… It has not even occurred to me to force her to do such a thing—
You wouldnt have to force her interrupted Meve smiling charmingly. You are still a strapping handsome man cousin. And Calanthes blood runs through the Lion Cub. Very hot blood. I knew Cali when she was young. When she saw a fellow she liked she leaped up and down so fast that if you put dry twigs beneath her feet they would have caught real fire. Her daughter Pavetta the Lion Cubs mother was exactly the same. So no doubt the Lion Cub has not fallen far from the apple tree. A bit of effort Foltest and the girl would not be long in resisting. That is what you are counting on admit it.
Of course hes counting on it chuckled Demawend. Our king has thought up a cunning little plan for himself! We assail the left bank and before we realise it our Foltest will have found the girl won her heart and have a young wife whom he will place on the throne of Cintra while her people cry for joy and pee in their knickers for happiness. For they will have their queen blood of the blood and flesh of the flesh of Calanthe. They will have a queen… albeit one who comes with a king. King Foltest.
What rubbish! yelled Foltest turning red then white in turn. Whats got into you? Theres not a grain of sense in your prattling!
There is a whole lot of sense said Vizimir dryly. Because I know that someone is searching for the child very earnestly. Who Foltest?
Its obvious! Vissegerd and the Cintrians!
No its not them. At least not just them. Someone else is too. Someone who is leaving a trail of corpses behind them. Someone who does not shrink from blackmail bribery or torture… While we are on the subject is a gentleman by the name of Rience in any of your services? Ah I see from your expressions that either he isnt or you wont admit it – which comes to the same thing. I repeat: they are searching for Calanthes granddaughter and searching in such a way as to make you think twice about their intentions. Who is looking for her I ask?
Hell! Foltest thumped his fist on the table. Its not me! It never occurred to me to marry some child for some throne! After all I—
After all you have been secretly sleeping with the Baroness La Valette for the past four years. Meve smiled again. You love each other like two turtle doves and just wait for the old baron to finally kick the bucket. What are you staring at? We all know about it. What do you think we pay our spies for? But for the throne of Cintra cousin many a king would be prepared to sacrifice his personal happiness—
Hold on. Henselt scratched his beard with a rasp. Many a king you say. Then leave Foltest in peace for a moment. There are others. In her time Calanthe wanted to give her granddaughters hand to Ervyll of Verdens son. Ervyll too might have caught a whiff of Cintra. And not just him…
Hmm… muttered Vizimir. True. Ervyll has three sons… And what about those present here who also have male descendants? Huh? Meve? Are you not by any chance pulling wool over our eyes?
You can count me out. The Queen of Lyria smiled even more charmingly. It is true two of my offspring are roaming the world – the fruits of delightful abandon – if they have not been brought to the gallows yet. I doubt that either of them would suddenly desire to be king. They were neither predisposed nor inclined that way. Both were even stupider than their father may he rest in peace. Whoever knew my deceased husband will understand what I mean.
Thats a fact agreed the King of Redania. I knew him. Are your sons really more stupid? Damn it I thought it wasnt possible to get any more stupid… Forgive me Meve…
Its nothing Vizimir.
Who else has sons?
You do Henselt.
My son is married!
And what is poison for? For the throne of Cintra as someone here so wisely said many would sacrifice their personal happiness. It would be worth it!
I will not permit such insinuations! And leave me alone! Others have sons too!
Niedamir of Hengfors has two. And is a widower himself. And he isnt old. And dont forget Esterad Thyssen of Kovir.
I would count those out. Vizimir shook his head. The Hengfors League and Kovir are planning a dynastic union with each other. They are not interested in Cintra or the south. Hmm… But Ervyll of Verden… Its not so far from him.
There is someone else who is just as near remarked Demawend suddenly.
Who?
Emhyr var Emreis. He is not married. And he is younger than you Foltest.
Bloody hell. The King of Redania frowned. If that were true… Emhyr would bugger us without grease! Its obvious that the people and nobility of Cintra will follow Calanthes blood. Imagine what would happen if Emhyr were to get his hands on the Lion Cub? Damn it thats all we need! Queen of Cintra and Empress of Nilfgaard!
Empress! snorted Henselt. You exaggerate Vizimir. What does Emhyr need the girl for what the hell does he need to get married for? The throne of Cintra? Emhyr already has Cintra! He conquered the country and made it a province of Nilfgaard! Hes got his whole butt on the throne and still has enough room to wriggle about!
Firstly noted Foltest Emhyr grips Cintra by law or rather by an aggressors lawlessness. If he had the girl and married her he could rule legally. You understand? Nilfgaard bound in marriage to Calanthes blood is no longer Nilfgaard the invader at which the entire north bares its teeth. It is Nilfgaard the neighbour whom one has to take into account. How would you want to force such a Nilfgaard beyond Marnadal beyond the Amell passes? Attacking a kingdom whose throne is legally occupied by the Lion Cub granddaughter of the Lioness of Cintra? Pox! I dont know whos looking for that child. Im not looking for her. But I declare that now Im going to start to. I still believe the girl is dead but we cant take the risk. It looks as if she is too important. If she survived then we must find her!
And shall we decide now who she will marry when we find her? Henselt grimaced. Such matters should not be left to chance. We could for that matter hand her over to Vissegerds guerrillas as a battle standard tied to a long pole – they could carry her before the front line as they attack the left bank. But if the recaptured Cintra is to be useful to us all… Surely you see what I mean? If we attack Nilfgaard and retrieve Cintra the Lion Cub can be put on the throne. But the Lion Cub can have only one husband. One who will look after our interests at the mouth of the Yaruga. Who of those present is going to volunteer?
Not me joked Meve. I waive the privilege.
I wouldnt exclude those who arent present here said Demawend seriously. Neither Ervyll nor Niedamir nor the Thyssens. And bear in mind that Vissegerd could surprise you and put the standard attached to a long pole to unexpected use. Youve heard about morganatic marriages? Vissegerd is old and as ugly as cows dung but with enough decoctions of absinthe and damiana down her throat the Lion Cub might unexpectedly fall in love with him! Is King Vissegerd included in our plans?
No muttered Foltest not in mine.
Hmm… Vizimir hesitated. Nor in mine. Vissegerd is a tool not a partner thats the role he is to play in our plans for attacking Nilfgaard – that and no other. Besides if the one who is so earnestly seeking the Lion Cub is indeed Emhyr var Emreis we cannot take the risk.
Absolutely not seconded Foltest. The Lion Cub cannot fall into Emhyrs hands. She cannot fall into anybodys— Into the wrong hands… Alive.
Infanticide? Meve grimaced. An ugly solution my kings. Unworthy. And surely unnecessarily drastic. First of all let us find the girl – because we still dont have her. And when we have found her give her to me. Ill keep her in some castle in the mountains for a couple of years and marry her off to one of my knights. When you see her again she will already have two children and a belly out to here.
Leading to if I count correctly at least three future eventual pretenders and usurpers? Vizimir nodded. No Meve. It is ugly indeed but the Lion Cub if she has survived must now die. For reasons of state. Gentlemen?
The rain hammered against the windows. The gale howled among the towers of Hagge castle.
The kings grew silent.
Vizimir Foltest Demawend Henselt and Meve repeated the marshal. They met in a secret council in Hagge Castle on the Pontar. They conferred in privacy.
How symbolic said the slender black-haired man wearing an elk tunic marked with the imprints of armour and rust stains without looking round. After all it was at Hagge not forty years ago that Virfuril defeated Medells armies strengthened his control over the Pontar Valley and established todays borders between Aedirn and Temeria. And today Demawend Virfurils son invites Foltest Medells son to Hagge summoning Vizimir of Tretogor Henselt of Ard Carraigh and the merry widow Meve of Lyria to complete the set. They are meeting now and holding council in secrecy. Can you guess what they are discussing Coehoorn?
I can the marshal replied succinctly. He did not say a word more. He knew that the man with his back turned hated anyone to display any eloquence or comment on obvious facts in his presence.
They did not invite Ethain of Cidaris. The man in the elk tunic turned away from the window clasped his hands behind his back and strolled slowly from the window to the table and then back again. Nor Ervyll of Verden. They did not invite Esterad Thyssen or Niedamir. Which means they are either very sure of themselves or very unsure. They did not invite anyone from the Chapter of Wizards. Which is interesting and significant. Coehoorn try to see to it that the wizards learn of this council. Let them know that their monarchs do not treat them as equals. It seems to me that the wizards of the Chapter have had some doubts in this respect. Disperse them.
Its an order.
Any news from Rience?
None.
The man paused at the window and stood there for a long while gazing at the hills drenched in rain. Coehoorn waited restlessly clenching and unclenching his fist around the pommel of his sword. He was afraid he would be forced to listen to a long monologue. The marshal knew that the man standing at the window considered his monologues a conversation and viewed conversation as a privilege and proof of trust. He knew this but still didnt like listening to the monologues.
How do you find the country Governor? Have you grown to like your new province?
He shuddered taken unawares. He did not expect the question. But he did not ponder the answer for long. Insincerity and indecisiveness could cost him a great deal.
No your Highness. I havent. That country is so… gloomy.
It was different once the man replied without looking round. And it will be different again. You will see. You will still see a beautiful happy Cintra Coehoorn. I promise you. But dont be saddened I shant keep you here long. Someone else will take over the governorship of the province. Ill be needing you in Dol Angra. Youll leave immediately once the rebellion is quashed. I need someone responsible in Dol Angra. Someone who will not allow himself to be provoked. The merry widow of Lyria or Demawend… will want to provoke us. Youll take the young officers in hand. Cool their hot heads. You will let yourselves be provoked only when I give the order. No sooner.
Yes sir!
The clatter of arms and spurs and the sound of raised voices came from the antechamber. Someone knocked on the door. The man in the elk tunic turned away from the window and nodded his head in consent. The marshal bowed a little and left.
The man returned to the table sat down and lowered his head over some maps. He studied them for a long time then finally rested his brow on his interlocked hands. The enormous diamond in his ring sparkled in the candlelight as if a thousand flames.
Your Highness? The door squeaked faintly.
The man did not change his position. But the marshal noticed that his hands twitched. He spotted it by the flash of the diamond. He closed the door carefully and quietly behind him.
News Coehoorn? From Rience maybe?
No your Highness. But good news. The rebellion in the province has been quelled. We have broken up the rebels. Only a few managed to escape to Verden. And weve caught their leader Duke Windhalm of Attre.
Good said the man after a while still not raising his head from his hands. Windhalm of Attre… Order him to be beheaded. No… Not beheaded. Executed in some other way. Spectacularly lengthily and cruelly. And publicly it goes without saying. A terrifying example is necessary. Something that will frighten others. Only please Coehoorn spare me the details. You dont have to bother with a vivid description in your report. I take no pleasure from it.
The marshal nodded then swallowed hard. He too found no pleasure in it. No pleasure whatsoever. He intended to leave the preparation and performance of the execution to the specialists and he did not have the least intention of asking those specialists for details. And above all he did not intend to be there.
You will be present at the execution. The man raised his head picked a letter up from the table and broke the seal. Officially. As the Governor of the Province of Cintra. You will stand in for me. I dont intend to watch it. Thats an order Coehoorn.
Yes sir! The marshal did not even try to hide his embarrassment and discomfort. The man who had given the order did not allow anything to be kept from him. And rarely did anyone succeed in doing so.
The man glanced at the open letter and almost immediately threw it into the fire into the hearth.
Coehoorn.
Yes your Highness?
I am not going to wait for Riences report. Set the magicians to work and have them prepare a telecommunication link with their point of contact in Redania. Let them pass on my verbal orders which must immediately be sent to Rience. The order is to run as follows: Rience is to stop pussyfooting around and to stop playing with the witcher. Else it could end badly. No one toys with the witcher. I know him Coehoorn. He is too clever to lead Rience to the Trail. I repeat Rience is to organise the assassination immediately to take the witcher out of the game at once. Hes to kill him and then disappear bide his time and await my orders. If he comes across the enchantresss trail before that he is to leave her alone. Not a hair on Yennefers head is to be harmed. Have you remembered that Coehoorn?
Yes sir.
The communiqué is to be coded and firmly secured against any magical deciphering. Forewarn the wizards about this. If they bungle it if any undesirables learn of my order I will hold them responsible.
Yes sir. The marshal hawked and pulled himself up straight.
What else Coehoorn?
The count… He is here already your Highness. He came at your command.
Already? He smiled. Such speed is worthy of admiration. I hope he didnt exhaust that black horse of his everyone envies so much. Have him come in.
Am I to be present during the conversation your Highness?
Of course Governor of Cintra.
Summoned from the antechambers the knight entered the chamber with an energetic strong and noisy stride his black armour grating. He stopped short drew himself up proudly threw his wet muddy black cloak back from his shoulder and laid his hand on the hilt of his mighty sword. He leaned his black helmet adorned with wings of a bird of prey on his hip. Coehoorn looked at the knights face. He saw there the hard pride of a warrior and impudence. He did not see any of the things that should have been visible in the face of one who had spent the past two years incarcerated in a place from which – as everything had indicated – he would only leave for the scaffold. A faint smile touched the marshals lips. He knew that the disdain for death and crazy courage of youngsters stemmed from a lack of imagination. He knew that perfectly well. He had once been such a youngster himself.
The man sitting at the table rested his chin on his interlaced fingers and looked at the knight intently. The youngster pulled himself up taut as a string.
In order for everything to be perfectly clear the man behind the table addressed him you should understand that the mistake you made in this town two years ago has not been forgiven. You are getting one more chance. You are getting one more order. My decision as to your ultimate fate depends on the way in which you carry it out.
The young knights face did not twitch and nor did a single feather on the wings adorning the helmet at his hip.
I never deceive anyone I never give anyone false illusions continued the man. So let it be known that naturally the prospect of saving your neck from the executioners axe exists only if you do not make a mistake this time. Your chances of a full pardon are small. Your chances of my forgiving and forgetting are… non-existent.
The young knight in the black armour did not flinch this time either but Coehoorn detected the flash in his eyes. He doesnt believe him he thought. He doesnt believe him and is deluding himself. He is making a great mistake.
I command your full attention continued the man behind the table. Yours too Coehoorn because the orders I am about to give concern you too. They come in a moment for I have to give some thought to their substance and delivery.
Marshal Menno Coehoorn Governor of the Province of Cintra and future Commander-in-Chief of the Dol Angra army lifted his head and stood to attention his hand on the pommel of his sword. The same attitude was assumed by the knight in black armour with the bird-of-prey-winged helmet. They both waited. In silence. Patiently. The way one should wait for orders the substance and presentation of which were being pondered by the Emperor of Nilfgaard Emhyr var Emreis Deithwen Addan yn Carn aep Morvudd the White Flame Dancing on the Grave-Mounds of Enemies.
Ciri woke.
She was lying or rather half-sitting with her head resting high on several pillows. The compresses on her forehead had grown warm and only slightly damp. She threw them off unable to bear their unpleasant weight and their stinging against her skin. She found it hard to breathe. Her throat was dry and her nose almost completely blocked with clots of blood. But the elixirs and spells had worked – the pain which had exploded within her skull and dimmed her sight a few hours ago had disappeared and given way to a dull throbbing and a sensation of pressure on her temples.
Carefully she touched her nose with the back of her hand. It was no longer bleeding.
What a strange dream I had she thought. The first dream for many days. The first where I wasnt afraid. The first which wasnt about me. I was an… observer. I saw everything as if from above from high up… As if I were a bird… A night bird…
A dream in which I saw Geralt.
In the dream it was night. And the rain which furrowed the surface of the canal spattered on the shingle roofs and thatches of sheds glistened on the planks of foot-bridges and the decks of boats and barges… And Geralt was there. Not alone. There was a man with him in a funny hat with a feather limp from the damp. And a slim girl in a green cloak with a hood… All three were walking slowly and carefully along a wet foot-bridge… And I saw them from above. As if I were a bird. A night bird…
Geralt had stopped short. Is it still far? he had asked. No the slim girl had answered shaking the water off her green cloak. Were almost there… Hey Dandilion dont lag behind or youll get lost in these culde-sacs… And where the hell is Philippa? I saw her a moment ago she was flying alongside the canal… What foul weather… Lets go. Lead on Shani. And between you and me where do you know this charlatan from? What have you got to do with him?
I sometimes sell him medicaments looted from the college workshop. What are you staring at me like that for? My stepfather can barely pay for my tuition… I sometimes need a little money… And the charlatan having real medicaments treats people… Or at least he doesnt poison them… Well lets get going.
Strange dream thought Ciri. Shame I woke up. Id like to have seen what was going to happen… Id like to know what they were doing there. Where they were going…
From the chamber next door came the sound of voices the voices which had woken her. Mother Nenneke was speaking quickly clearly worked up agitated and angry. You betrayed my trust she was saying. I shouldnt have allowed it. I might have guessed that your dislike of her would lead to disaster. I shouldnt have allowed you to— Because after all I know you. Youre ruthless youre cruel and to make matters worse it turns out youre also irresponsible and careless. Youre torturing that child mercilessly forcing her to try things which she cant possibly do. Youve no heart.
You really have no heart Yennefer.
Ciri pricked up her ears wanting to hear the enchantresss reply her cold hard and melodious voice. Wanting to hear how she reacted how she sneered at the high priestess how she ridiculed her over-protectiveness. She wanted to hear her say what she usually said – that using magic is no joke that it isnt an occupation for young ladies made of porcelain for dolls blown from thin glass. But Yennefer answered quietly so quietly that the girl could neither understand nor even make out the individual words.
Ill fall asleep she thought carefully and delicately feeling her nose which was still tender painful and blocked with clotted blood. Ill go back to my dream. Ill see what Geralt is doing there in the night in the rain by the canal…
Yennefer was holding her by the hand. They were both walking down a long dark corridor between stone columns or perhaps statues. Ciri could not make out their forms in the thick darkness. But there was someone there in that darkness someone hiding and observing them as they walked. She heard whispers quiet as the rustle of the wind.
Yennefer was holding her by the hand walking briskly and assuredly full of decisiveness so much so that Ciri could barely keep up with her. Doors opened before them in succession one after another. An infinite number of doors with gigantic heavy leaves opened up before them noiselessly.
The darkness thickened. Ciri saw yet another great door in front of her. Yennefer did not slow her stride but Ciri suddenly knew that this door would not open of its own accord. And she suddenly had an overwhelming certainty that this door must not be opened. That she must not go through it. That behind this door something was waiting for her…
She stopped short tried to pull away but Yennefers hand was strong and unyielding and unrelentingly dragged her forward. And Ciri finally understood that she had been betrayed deceived sold out. That ever since the first meeting from the very beginning from the first day she had been no more than a marionette a puppet on a string. She tugged harder tore herself away from that grip. The darkness undulated like smoke and the whispering in the dark all of a sudden died away. The magician took a step forward stopped turned round and looked at her.
If youre afraid turn back.
That door mustnt be opened. You know that.
I do.
But youre still leading me there.
If youre afraid turn back. You still have time to turn back. Its not too late.
And you?
For me it is.
Ciri looked around. Despite the omnipresent darkness she saw the door which they had passed through – and a long distant vista. And there from a distance from the darkness she heard…
The clatter of hooves. The grating of black armour. And the flutter of the wings of a bird of prey. And the voice. That quiet voice boring into her skull…
You have made a mistake. You mistook the stars reflected in the surface of the lake at night for the heavens.
She woke and lifted her head abruptly displacing the compress fresh because it was still cool and wet. She was drenched in sweat; the dull pain was ringing and throbbing in her temples again. Yennefer was sitting beside on the bed. Her head was turned away so that Ciri did not see her face. She saw only the tempest of black hair.
I had a dream… whispered Ciri. In the dream…
I know the magician said in a strange voice not her own. Thats why Im here. Im beside you.
Beyond the window in the darkness the rain rustled in the leaves of the trees.
Damn it snarled Dandilion shaking water from the brim of his hat soggy from the rain. Its a veritable fortress not a house. Whats that fraud frightened of fortifying himself like that?
Boats and barges moored to the bank rocked lazily on water furrowed by the rain bumping against each other creaking and rattling their chains.
Its the port explained Shani. Theres no shortage of thugs and scum both local and just passing through. Quite a few people visit Myhrman bringing money… Everybody knows that. And that he lives alone. So hes secured himself. Are you surprised?
Not in the least. Geralt looked at the mansion built on stakes dug into the bottom of the canal some ten yards from the shore. Im trying to work out how to get to that islet to that waterside cottage. Well probably have to borrow one of those boats on the quiet—
No need said the student of medicine. Theres a drawbridge.
And how are you going to persuade that charlatan to lower it? Besides theres also the door and we didnt bring a battering ram with us—
Leave it to me.
An enormous grey owl landed soundlessly on the decks railing fluttered its wings ruffled its feathers and turned into Philippa Eilhart equally ruffled and wet.
What am I doing here? the magician mumbled angrily. What am I doing here with you damn it? Balancing on a wet bar… And on the edge of betraying the state. If Dijkstra finds out I was helping you… And on top of it all this endless drizzle! I hate flying in the rain. Is this it? This is Myhrmans house?
Yes confirmed Geralt. Listen Shani well try…
They bunched together and started whispering concealed in the dark under the eaves of a huts reed roof. A strip of light fell on the water from the tavern on the opposite side of the canal. Singing laughter and yelling resounded. Three bargemen rolled out on to the shore. Two were arguing tugging shoving each other and repeatedly swearing the same curses to the point of boredom. The third leaning against a stake was peeing into the canal and whistling. He was out of tune.
Dong metallically reverberated the iron sheet tied by a strap to a pole by the deck. Dong.
The charlatan Myhrman opened a tiny window and peered out. The lantern in his hand only blinded him so he set it aside.
Who the devil is ringing at this time of the night? he bawled furiously. Whack yourself on that empty head of yours you shit you lame dick when you get the urge to knock! Get out get lost you old soaks right now! Ive got my crossbow at the ready here! Does one of you want six inches of crossbow bolt in their arse?
Master Myhrman! Its me Shani!
Eh? The charlatan leaned out further. Miss Shani? Now in the night? How come?
Lower the bridge Master Myhrman! Ive brought you what you asked for!
Right now in the dark? Couldnt you do it during the day miss?
Too many eyes here during the day. A slim outline in a green cloak loomed on the deck. If word gets out about what Im bringing you theyll throw me out of the Academy. Lower the bridge Im not going to stand around in the rain Im soaked!
Youre not alone miss the charlatan noted suspiciously. You usually come alone. Whos there with you?
A friend a student like me. Was I supposed to come alone at night to this forsaken neighbourhood of yours? What you think I dont value my maidenhood or something? Let me in damn it!
Muttering under his breath Myhrman released the stopper on the winch and the bridge creaked down hitting the planks of the deck. The old fraud minced to the door and pulled back the bolts and locks. Without putting his crossbow aside he carefully peered out.
He didnt notice the fist clad in a black silver-studded glove as it flew towards the side of his head. But although the night was dark the moon was new and the sky overcast he suddenly saw ten thousand dazzlingly bright stars.
Toublanc Michelet drew the whetstone over the blade of his sword once more looking totally engrossed in this activity.
So we are to kill one man for you. He set the stone aside wiped the blade with a piece of greased rabbit skin and closely examined the blade. An ordinary fellow who walks around the streets of Oxenfurt by himself without a guard an escort or bodyguards. Doesnt even have any knaves hanging about. We wont have to clamber into any castles town halls mansion houses or garrisons to get at him… Is that right honourable Rience? Have I understood you correctly?
The man with a face disfigured by a burn nodded narrowing his moist eyes with their unpleasant expression a little.
On top of that Toublanc continued after killing this fellow we wont be forced to remain hidden somewhere for the next six months because no one is going to chase or follow us. No one is going to set a posse or reward seekers on us. We wont get drawn into any blood feuds or vendettas. In other words Master Rience were to finish off an ordinary common fool of no importance to you?
The man with the scar did not reply. Toublanc looked at his brothers sitting motionless and stiff on the bench. Rizzi Flavius and Lodovico as usual said nothing. In the team they formed it was they who killed Toublanc who talked. Because only Toublanc had attended the Temple school. He was as efficient at killing as his brothers but he could also read and write. And talk.
And in order to kill such an ordinary dunce Master Rience youre hiring not just any old thug from the port but us the Michelet brothers? For a hundred Novigrad crowns?
That is your usual rate drawled the man with the scar correct?
Incorrect contradicted Toublanc coldly. Because were not for the killing of ordinary fools. But if we do… Master Rience this fool you want to see made a corpse is going to cost you two hundred. Two hundred untrimmed shining crowns with the stamp of the Novigrad mint on them. Do you know why? Because theres a catch here honourable sir. You dont have to tell us what it is we can manage without that. But you will pay for it. Two hundred I say. You shake on that price and you can consider that no-friend of yours dead. You dont want to agree find someone else for the job.
Silence fell in the cellar reeking of mustiness and soured wine. A cockroach briskly moving its limbs scudded along the dirt floor. Flavius Michelet moving his leg in a flash flattened it with a crunch – hardly changing his position and not changing his expression in the least.
Agreed said Rience. You get two hundred. Lets go.
Toublanc Michelet professional killer from the age of fourteen did not betray his surprise with so much as the flicker of an eyelid. He had not counted on being able to bargain for more than a hundred and twenty a hundred and fifty at the most. Suddenly he was sure that he had named too low a price for the snag hidden in his latest job.
Charlatan Myhrman came to on the floor of his own room. He was lying on his back trussed up like a sheep. The back of his head was excruciatingly painful and he recalled that in falling he had thumped his head on the door-frame. The temple where he had been struck also hurt. He could not move because his chest was being heavily and mercilessly crushed by a high boot fastened with buckles. The old fraud squinting and wrinkling up his face looked up. The boot belonged to a tall man with hair as white as milk. Myhrman could not see his face – it was hidden in a darkness not dispersed by the lantern standing on the table.
Spare my life… he groaned. Spare me I swear by the gods… Ill hand you my money… Hand you everything… Ill show you where its hidden…
Wheres Rience Myhrman?
The charlatan shook at the sound of the voice. He was not a fearful man; there were not many things of which he was afraid. But the voice of the white-haired man contained them all. And a few others in addition.
With a superhuman effort of the will he overcame the fear crawling in his viscera like some foul insect.
Huh? He feigned astonishment. What? Who? What did you say?
The man bent over and Myhrman saw his face. He saw his eyes. And the sight made his stomach slip right down to his rectum.
Dont beat about the bush Myhrman dont twist up your tail. The familiar voice of Shani the medical student came from the shadows. When I was here three days ago here in this high-backed chair at this table sat a gentleman in a cloak lined with musk-rat. He was drinking wine and you never entertain anybody – only the best of friends. He flirted with me brazenly urged me to go dancing at the Three Little Bells. I even had to slap his hand because he was starting to fondle me remember? And you said: Leave her alone Master Rience dont frighten her I needs must be on good terms with the little academics and do business. And you both chuckled you and your Master Rience with the burned face. So dont start playing dumb now because youre not dealing with someone dumber than yourself. Talk while youre still being asked politely.
Oh you cocksure little student thought the charlatan. You treacherous creep you red-haired hussy Im going to find you and pay you back… Just let me get myself out of this.
What Rience? he yelped writhing trying in vain to free himself from the heel pressing down on his breast-bone. And how am I to know who he is and where he is? All sorts come here what am I—?
The white-haired man leaned over further slowly pulling the dagger from his other boot while pressing down harder on the charlatans chest with his first.
Myrhman he said quietly believe me or dont – as you like. But if you dont immediately tell me where Rience is… If you dont immediately reveal how you contact him… Then I will feed you piece by piece to the eels in the canal. Starting with your ears.
There was something in the white-haired mans voice which made the charlatan believe his every word. He stared at the stiletto blade and knew that it was sharper than the knives with which he punctured ulcers and boils. He started to shake so hard that the boot resting on his chest bounced nervously. But he did not say anything. He could not say anything. Not for the time being. Because if Rience were to return and ask why he had betrayed him Myhrman would have to be able to show him why. One ear he thought one ear I have to endure. Then Ill tell him…
Why waste time and mess about with blood? A womans soft alto suddenly resounded from the semi-darkness. Why risk him twisting the truth and lying? Allow me to take care of him my way. Hell talk so fast hell bite his own tongue. Hold him down.
The charlatan howled and struggled against his fetters but the white-haired man crushed him to the floor with his knee grabbed him by the hair and twisted his head. Someone knelt down next to them. He smelled perfume and wet bird feathers felt the touch of fingers on his temple. He wanted to scream but terror choked him – all he managed was a croak.
You want to scream already? The soft alto right next to his ear purred like a cat. Too soon Myhrman too soon. I havent started yet. But I will in a moment. If evolution has traced any groove at all in your brain then Im going to plough it somewhat deeper. And then youll see what a scream can really be.
And so said Vilgefortz having heard the report our kings have started to think independently. They have started to plan independently in an amazingly short time evolving from thinking on a tactical level to a strategic one? Interesting. Not so long ago – at Sodden – all they could do was gallop around with savage cries and swords raised at the van of their company without even looking around to check their company hadnt by chance been left behind or wasnt galloping in an entirely different direction. And today there they are – in Hagge Castle – deciding the fate of the world. Interesting. But to be honest I expected as much.
We know confirmed Artaud Terranova. And we remember you warned us about it. Thats why were telling you about it.
Thank you for remembering smiled the wizard and Tissaia de Vries was suddenly sure that he had already been aware of each of the facts just presented to him and had been for a long time. She did not say a word. Sitting upright in her armchair she evened up her lace cuffs as the left fell a little differently from the right. She felt Terranovas unfavourable gaze and Vilgefortzs amused eyes on her. She knew that her legendary pedantry either annoyed or amused everybody. But she did not care in the least.
What does the Chapter say to all this?
First of all retorted Terranova we would like to hear your opinion Vilgefortz.
First of all smiled the wizard let us have something to eat and drink. We have enough time – allow me to prove myself a good host. I can see you are frozen through and tired from your journeys. How many changes of portals if I may ask?
Three. Tissaia de Vries shrugged.
It was nearer for me added Artaud. Two proved enough. But still complicated I must admit.
Such foul weather everywhere?
Everywhere.
So let us fortify ourselves with good fare and an old red wine from Cidaris. Lydia would you be so kind?
Lydia van Bredevoort Vilgefortzs assistant and personal secretary appeared from behind the curtain like an ethereal phantom and smiled with her eyes at Tissaia de Vries. Tissaia controlling her face replied with a pleasant smile and bow of her head. Artaud Terranova stood up and bowed with reverence. He too controlled his expression very well. He knew Lydia.
Two servants bustling around and rustling their skirts swiftly laid out the tableware plates and platters. Lydia van Bredevoort delicately conjuring up a tiny flame between her thumb and index finger lit the candles in the candelabras. Tissaia saw traces of oil paint on her hand. She filed it in her memory so later after supper she could ask the young enchantress to show her her latest work. Lydia was a talented artist.
They supped in silence. Artaud Terranova did not stint himself and reached without embarrassment for the platters and – probably a little too frequently and without his hosts encouragement – clanged the silver top of the carafe of red wine. Tissaia de Vries ate slowly devoting more attention to arranging her plates cutlery and napkins symmetrically – although in her opinion they still lay irregularly and hurt her predilection for order and her aesthetic sensibility – than to the fare. She drank sparingly. Vilgefortz ate and drank even more sparingly. Lydia of course did not drink or eat at all.
The candle flames undulated in long red and golden whiskers of fire. Drops of rain tinkled against the stained glass of the windows.
Well Vilgefortz said Terranova finally rummaging in a platter with his fork in search of an adequately fatty piece of game. What is your position regarding our monarchs behaviour? Hen Gedymdeith and Francesca sent us here because they want to know your opinion. Tissaia and I are also interested. The Chapter wants to assume a unanimous stand in this matter. And should it come to action we also want to act unanimously. So what do you advise?
It flatters me greatly – with a gesture Vilgefortz thanked Lydia who was offering to put more broccoli on his plate – that my opinion in this matter should be decisive for the Chapter.
No one said that. Artaud poured himself some more wine. Were going to make a collective decision anyway when the Chapter meets. But we wish to let everybody have the opportunity to express themselves beforehand so we can have an idea of all the various views. Were listening therefore.
If weve finished supping let us go through into the workshop Lydia proposed telepathically smiling with her eyes. Terranova looked at her smile and quickly downed what he had in his chalice. To the dregs.
Good idea. Vilgefortz wiped his fingers on a napkin. Well be more comfortable there. My protection against magical eavesdropping is stronger there too. Let us go. You can bring the carafe Artaud.
I wont say no. Its my favourite vintage.
They went through to the workshop. Tissaia could not stop herself from casting an eye over the workbench weighed down with retorts crucibles test-tubes crystals and numerous magical utensils. All were enveloped in a screening spell but Tissaia de Vries was an Archmage – there was no screen she could not penetrate. And she was a little curious as to what the mage had been doing of late. She worked out the configuration of the recently used apparatus in a flash. It served for the detection of persons who had disappeared while enabling a psychic vision by means of the crystal metal stone method. The wizard was either searching for someone or resolving a theoretical logistical problem. Vilgefortz of Roggeveen was well known for his love of solving such problems.
They sat down in carved ebony armchairs. Lydia glanced at Vilgefortz caught the sign transmitted by his eye and immediately left. Tissaia sighed imperceptibly.
Everyone knew that Lydia van Bredevoort was in love with Vilgefortz of Roggeveen that she had loved him for years with a silent relentless and stubborn love. The wizard it is to be understood also knew about this but pretended not to. Lydia made it easier for him by never betraying her feelings to him – she never took the slightest step or made the slightest gesture transmitted no sign by thought and even if she could speak would never have said a word. She was too proud. Vilgefortz too did nothing because he did not love Lydia. He could of course simply have have made her his lover tied her to him even more strongly and who knows maybe even made her happy. There were those who advised him to do so. But Vilgefortz did not. He was too proud and too much a man of principle. The situation therefore was hopeless but stable and this patently satisfied them both.
So. The young wizard broke the silence. The Chapter are racking their brains about what to do about the initiatives and plans of our kings? Quite unnecessarily. Their plans must simply be ignored.
I beg your pardon? Artaud Terranova froze with the chalice in his left hand the carafe in his right. Did I understand you correctly? We are to do nothing? Were to let—
We already have interrupted Vilgefortz. Because no one asked us for our permission. And no one will. I repeat we ought to pretend that we know nothing. That is the only rational thing to do.
The things they have thought up threaten war and on a grand scale at that.
The things they have thought up have been made known to us thanks to enigmatic and incomplete information which comes from a mysterious and highly dubious source. So dubious that the word disinformation stubbornly comes to mind. And even if it were true their designs are still at the planning stage and will remain so for a long while yet. And if they move beyond that stage… Well then we will act accordingly.
You mean to say Terranova screwed up his face we will dance to the tune they play?
Yes Artaud. Vilgefortz looked at him and his eyes flashed. You will dance to the tune they play. Or you will take leave of the dance-floor. Because the orchestras podium is too high for you to climb up there and tell the musicians to play some other tune. Realise that at last. If you think another solution is possible you are making a mistake. You mistake the stars reflected in the surface of the lake at night for the heavens.
The Chapter will do as he says disguising his order as advice thought Tissaia de Vries. We are all pawns on his chess board. Hes moved up grown obscured us with his brightness subordinated us to him. Were pawns in his game. A game the rules of which we do not know.
Her left cuff had once again arranged itself differently from the right. The enchantress adjusted it with care.
The kings plans are already at the stage of practical realisation she said slowly. In Kaedwen and Aedirn an offensive against the Scoiatael has begun. The blood of young elves is flowing. It is reaching the point of persecution and pogroms against non-humans. There is talk of an attack on the free elves of Dol Blathanna and the Grey Mountains. This is mass murder. Are we to say to Gedymdeith and Enid Findabair that you advise us to stand idly by to watch and do nothing? Pretending we cant see anything?
Vilgefortz turned his head towards her. Now youre going to change tactics thought Tissaia. Youre a player you can hear which way the dice roll on the table. Youre going to change tactics. Youre going to strike a different note.
Vilgefortz did not lower his eyes from hers.
You are right he said curtly. You are right Tissaia. War with Nilfgaard is one thing but we must not look on idly at the massacre of non-humans and do nothing. I suggest we call a convention a general convention of everyone up to and including Masters of the Third Degree including those who have been sitting on royal councils since Sodden. At the convention we will make them see reason and order them to keep their monarchs in check.
I second this proposition said Terranova. Let us call a convention and remind them to whom they owe first loyalty. Note that even some members of our Council now advise kings. The kings are served by Carduin Philippa Eilhart Fercart Radcliffe Yennefer—
At the last name Vilgefortz twitched internally. But Tissaia de Vries was an Archmage. Tissaia sensed the thought the impulse leaping from the workbench and magical apparatus to the two volumes lying on the table. Both books were invisible enveloped in magic. The magician focused herself and penetrated the screen.
Aen Ithlinnespeath the prophecy foretold by Ithlinne Aegli aep Aevenien the elven seeress. The prophecy of the end of civilisation the prophecy of annihilation destruction and the return of barbarianism which are to come with the masses of ice pressing down from the borders of the eternal freeze. And the other book… Very old… Falling apart… Aen Hen Ichaer… The Elder Blood… The Blood of Elves?
Tissaia? And what do you think?
I second it. The enchantress adjusted her ring which had turned the wrong way round. I second Vilgefortzs plan. Let us call a convention. As soon as possible.
Metal stone crystal she thought. Are you looking for Yennefer? Why? And what does she have to do with Ithlins prophecy? Or with the Elder Blood of the Elves? What are you brewing Vilgefortz?
Im sorry said Lydia van Bredevoort telepathically coming in without a sound. The wizard stood up.
Forgive me he said but this is urgent. Ive been waiting for this letter since yesterday. It will only take a minute.
Artaud yawned muffled a belch and reached for the carafe. Tissaia looked at Lydia. Lydia smiled. With her eyes. She could not do so any other way.
The lower half of Lydia van Bredevoorts face was an illusion.
Four years ago on Vilgefortzs – her masters – recommendation Lydia had taken part in experiments concerning the properties of an artefact found amongst the excavations of an ancient necropolis. The artefact turned out to be cursed. It activated only once. Of the five wizards taking part in the experiment three died on the spot. The fourth lost his eyes both hands and went mad. Lydia escaped with burns a mangled jaw and a mutation of the larynx and throat which to this day effectively resisted all efforts at regeneration. A powerful illusion was therefore drawn so that people did not faint at the sight of Lydias face. It was a very strong very efficiently placed illusion difficult for even the Chosen Ones to penetrate.
Hmm… Vilgefortz put the letter aside. Thank you Lydia.
Lydia smiled. The messenger is waiting for a reply she said.
There will be no reply.
I understand. I have given orders to prepare chambers for your guests.
Thank you. Tissaia Artaud I apologise for the short delay. Let us continue. Where were we?
Nowhere thought Tissaia de Vries. But Im listening carefully to you. Because at some stage youll finally mention the thing which really interests you.
Ah began Vilgefortz slowly. Now I know what I wanted to say. Im thinking about those members of the Council who have had the least experience. Fercart and Yennefer. Fercart as far as I know is tied to Foltest of Temeria and sits on the kings council with Triss Merigold. But who is Yennefer tied to? You said Artaud that she is one of those who are serving kings.
Artaud exaggerated said Tissaia calmly. Yennefer is living in Vengerberg so Demawend sometimes turns to her for help but they do not work together all the time. It cannot be said for certain that she is serving Demawend.
How is her sight? Everything is all right I hope?
Yes. Everythings all right.
Good. Very good. I was worried… You know I wanted to contact her but it turned out she had left. No one knew where for.
Stone metal crystal thought Tissaia de Vries. Everything that Yennefer wears is active and cannot be detected using psychic visions. You wont find her that way my dear. If Yennefer does not wish anyone to know where she is no one will find out.
Write to her she said calmly straightening out her cuffs. And send the letter in the ordinary way. It will get there without fail. And Yennefer wherever she is will reply. She always does.
Yennefer threw in Artaud frequently disappears sometimes for entire months. The reasons tend to be quite trivial…
Tissaia looked at him pursing her lips. The wizard fell silent. Vilgefortz smiled faintly.
Precisely he said. That is just what I thought. At one time she was closely tied to… a certain witcher. Geralt if Im not mistaken. It seems it wasnt just an ordinary passing affair. It appeared Yennefer was quite strongly involved…
Tissaia de Vries sat up straight and gripped the armrests of her chair.
Why are you asking about that? Theyre personal matters. It is none of our business.
Of course. Vilgefortz glanced at the letter lying discarded on the pulpit. It is none of our business. But Im not being guided by unhealthy curiosity but concern about the emotional state of a member of the Council. I am wondering about Yennefers reaction to the news of… of Geralts death. I presume she would get over it come to terms with it without falling into a depression or exaggerated mourning?
No doubt she would said Tissaia coldly. Especially as such news has been reaching her every now and again – and always proving to be a rumour.
Thats right confirmed Terranova. This Geralt or whatever hes called knows how to fend for himself. And why be surprised? He is a mutant a murdering machine programmed to kill and not let himself be killed. And as for Yennefer let us not exaggerate her alleged emotions. We know her. She does not give in to emotions. She toyed with the witcher thats all. She was fascinated with death which this character constantly courts. And when he finally brings it onto himself that will be the end of it.
For the time being remarked Tissaia de Vries dryly the witcher is alive.
Vilgefortz smiled and once more glanced at the letter lying in front of him.
Is that so? he said. I dont think so.
Geralt flinched a little and swallowed hard. The initial shock of drinking the elixir had passed and the second stage was beginning to take effect as indicated by a faint but unpleasant dizziness which accompanied the adaptation of his sight to darkness.
The adaptation progressed quickly. The deep darkness of the night paled; everything around him started to take on shades of grey shades which were at first hazy and unclear then increasingly contrasting distinct and sharp. In the little street leading to the canal bank which a moment ago had been as dark as the inside of a tar barrel Geralt could now make out the rats roaming through the gutters and sniffing at puddles and gaps in the walls.
His hearing too had been heightened by the witchers decoction. The deserted tangle of lanes where only a moment ago there had been the sound of rain against guttering began to come to life to throb with sounds. He heard the cries of cats fighting dogs barking on the other side of the canal laughter and shouting from the taprooms and inns of Oxenfurt yelling and singing from the bargemens tavern and the distant quiet warble of a flute playing a jaunty tune. The dark sleepy houses came to life as well – Geralt could make out the snoring of slumbering people the thuds of oxen in enclosures the snorting of horses in stables. From one of the houses in the depths of the street came the stifled spasmodic moans of a woman in the throes of lovemaking.
The sounds increased grew louder. He now made out the obscene lyrics of the carousing songs learned the name of the moaning womans lover. From Myhrmans homestead on the canal came the broken uncoordinated gibberish of the charlatan who had been put by Philippa Eilharts treatment into a state of complete and no doubt permanent idiocy.
Dawn was approaching. It had finally stopped raining a wind started up which blew the clouds away. The sky in the east was clearly paling.
The rats in the lane suddenly grew uneasy scattered in all directions and hid amongst the crates and rubbish.
The witcher heard footsteps. Four or five men; he could not as yet say exactly how many. He looked up but did not see Philippa.
Immediately he changed tactics. If Rience was amongst those approaching he had little chance of grabbing him. He would first have to fight his escort and he did not want to do so. Firstly as he was under the influence of the elixir those men would have to die. Secondly Rience would then have the opportunity to flee.
The footsteps grew nearer. Geralt emerged from the shadows.
Rience loomed out of the lane. The witcher recognised the sorcerer instantly and instinctively although he had never seen him before. The burn a gift from Yennefer was masked by the shadow of his hood.
He was alone. His escort did not reveal themselves remaining hidden in the little street. Geralt immediately understood why. Rience knew who was waiting for him by the charlatans house. Rience had suspected an ambush yet he had still come. The witcher realised why. And that was even before he had heard the quiet grating of swords being drawn from their scabbards. Fine he thought. If thats what you want fine.
It is a pleasure hunting for you said Rience quietly. You appear where youre wanted of your own accord.
The same can be said of you calmly retorted the witcher. You appeared here. I wanted you here and here you are.
You must have pushed Myhrman hard to tell you about the amulet to show you where it is hidden. And how to activate it to send out a message. But Myhrman didnt know that the amulet informs and warns at the same time and so he could not have told you even if roasted on red coals. I have distributed a good many of these amulets. I knew that sooner or later you would come across one of them.
Four men emerged from around a corner of the little street. They moved slowly deftly and noiselessly. They still kept to the areas of darkness and wielded their drawn swords in such a way as not to be betrayed by a flash of blades. The witcher obviously saw them clearly. But he did not reveal the fact. Fine murderers he thought. If thats what you want thats what youll get.
I waited continued Rience without moving from the spot and here you are. I intend to finally rid the earth of your burden you foul changeling.
You intend? You overrate yourself. You are nothing but a tool. A thug hired by others to deal with their dirty work. Who hired you stooge?
You want to know too much mutant. You call me a stooge? And do you know what you are? A heap of dung on the road which has to be removed because someone prefers not to soil their boots. No I am not going to disclose who that person is to you although I could. But I will tell you something else so you have something to think about on your way to hell. I already know where to find the little bastard you were looking after. And I know where to find that witch of yours Yennefer. My patrons dont care about her but I bear the whore a personal grudge. As soon as Ive finished with you Im going after her. Ill see to it that she regrets her tricks with fire. Oh yes she is going to regret them. For a very long time.
You shouldnt have said that. The witcher smiled nastily feeling the euphoria of battle aroused by the elixir reacting with adrenalin. Before you said that you still had a chance to live. Now you dont.
A powerful oscillation of his witchers medallion warned him of a sudden assault. He jumped aside and drawing his sword in a flash deflected and annihilated the violent paralysing wave of magical energy directed at him with his rune-covered blade. Rience backed away raised his arm to make a move but at the last moment took fright. Not attempting a second spell he swiftly retreated down the lane. The witcher could not run after him – the four men who thought they were concealed in the shadows threw themselves at him. Swords flashed.
They were professionals. All four of them. Experienced skilled professionals working as a team. They came at him in pairs two on the left two on the right. In pairs – so that one always covered the others back. The witcher chose those on the left. On top of the euphoria produced by the elixir came fury.
The first thug attacked with a feint from dextra only to jump aside and allow the man behind him to execute a deceptive thrust. Geralt spun in a pirouette evaded and passed by them and with the very tip of his sword slashed the other one from behind across the occiput shoulders and back. He was angry and hit hard. A fountain of blood spurted on the wall.
The first man backed away with lightning speed making room for the next pair. These separated for the attack slashing their swords from two directions in such a way that only one blow could be parried the other having to meet its aim. Geralt did not parry and whirling in a pirouette came between them. In order not to collide they both had to break their teamed rhythm their rehearsed steps. One of them managed to turn in a soft feline feint and leaped away dextrously. The other did not have time. He lost his balance and stumbled backwards. The witcher turning in a reverse pirouette used his momentum to slash him across the lower back. He was angry. He felt his sharp witchers blade sever the spine. A terrifying howl echoed down the streets. The two remaining men immediately attacked him showering him with blows which he parried with the greatest of difficulties. He went into a pirouette and tore himself from beneath the flashing blades. But instead of leaning his back against the wall and defending himself he attacked.
They were not expecting it did not have time to leap away and apart. One of them countered but the witcher evaded the counter-attack spun slashed from behind – blindly – counting on the rush of air. He was angry. He aimed low at the belly. And hit his mark. He heard a stifled cry but did not have time to look back. The last of the thugs was already at his side already striking a nasty sinistra with a quarte. Geralt parried at the last moment statically without a turn with a quarte from dextra. The thug making use of the impetus of the parry unwound like a spring and slashed from a half-turn wide and hard. Too hard. Geralt was already spinning. The killers blade considerably heavier than the witchers cut the air and the thug had to follow the blow. The impetus caused him to turn. Geralt slipped out of the half-turn just beside him very close. He saw his contorted face his horrified eyes. He was angry. He struck. Short but powerful. And sure. Right in the eyes.
He heard Shanis terrified scream as she tried to pull herself free of Dandilion on the bridge leading to the charlatans house.
Rience retreated into the depths of the lane raising and spreading both arms in front of him a magical light already beginning to exude from them. Geralt grasped his sword with both hands and without second thoughts ran towards him. The sorcerers nerves could not take it. Without completing his spell he began to run away yelling incomprehensibly. But Geralt understood. He knew that Rience was calling for help. Begging for help.
And help arrived. The little street blazed with a bright light and on the dilapidated sullied walls of a house flared the fiery oval of a portal. Rience threw himself towards it. Geralt jumped. He was furious.
Toublanc Michelet groaned and curled up clutching his riven belly. He felt the blood draining from him flowing rapidly through his fingers. Not far from him lay Flavius. He had still been twitching a moment ago but now he lay motionless. Toublanc squeezed his eyelids shut then opened them. But the owl sitting next to Flavius was clearly not a hallucination – it did not disappear. He groaned again and turned his head away.
Some wench a young one judging by her voice was screaming hysterically.
Let me go! There are wounded there! Ive got to… Im a medical student Dandilion! Let me go do you hear?
You cant help them replied Dandilion in a dull voice. Not after a witchers sword… Dont even go there. Dont look… I beg you Shani dont look.
Toublanc felt someone kneel next to him. He detected the scent of perfume and wet feathers. He heard a quiet gentle soothing voice. It was hard to make out the words the annoying screams and sobs of the young wench interfered. Of that… medical student. But if it was the medical student who was yelling then who was kneeling next to him? Toublanc groaned.
…be all right. Everything will be all right.
The son… of… a… bitch he grunted. Rience… He told us… An ordinary fool… But it… was a witcher… Caa… tch… Heee… elp… My… guts…
Quiet quiet my son. Keep calm. Its all right. It doesnt hurt any more. Isnt that right it doesnt hurt? Tell me who called you up here? Who introduced you to Rience? Who recommended him? Who got you into this? Tell me please my son. And then everything will be all right. Youll see itll be all right. Tell me please.
Toublanc tasted blood in his mouth. But he did not have the strength to spit it out. His cheek pressing into the wet earth he opened his mouth and blood poured out.
He no longer felt anything.
Tell me the gentle voice kept repeating. Tell me my son.
Toublanc Michelet professional murderer since the age of fourteen closed his eyes and smiled a bloodied smile. And whispered what he knew.
And when he opened his eyes he saw a stiletto with a narrow blade and a tiny golden hilt.
Dont be frightened said the gentle voice as the point of the stiletto touched his temple. This wont hurt.
Indeed it did not hurt.
He caught up with the sorcerer at the last moment just in front of the portal. Having already thrown his sword aside his hands were free and his fingers extended in a leap dug into the edge of Riences cloak. Rience lost his balance; the tug had bent him backwards forcing him to totter back. He struggled furiously violently ripped the cloak from clasp to clasp and freed himself. Too late.
Geralt spun him round by hitting him in the shoulder with his right hand then immediately struck him in the neck under the ear with his left. Rience reeled but did not fall. The witcher jumping softly caught up with him and forcefully dug his fist under his ribs. The sorcerer moaned and drooped over the fist. Geralt grabbed him by the front of his doublet spun him and threw him to the ground. Pressed down by the witchers knee Rience extended his arm and opened his mouth to cast a spell. Geralt clenched his fist and thumped him from above. Straight in the mouth. His lips split like blackcurrants.
Youve already received a present from Yennefer he uttered in a hoarse voice. Now youre getting one from me.
He struck once more. The sorcerers head bounced up; blood spurted onto the witchers forehead and cheeks. Geralt was slightly surprised – he had not felt any pain but had no doubt been injured in the fight. It was his blood. He did not bother nor did he have time to look for the wound and take care of it. He unclenched his fist and walloped Rience once more. He was angry.
Who sent you? Who hired you?
Rience spat blood at him. The witcher struck him yet again.
Who?
The fiery oval of the portal flared more strongly; the light emanating from it flooded the entire lane. The witcher felt the power throbbing from the oval had felt it even before his medallion had begun to oscillate violently in warning.
Rience also felt the energy streaming from the portal sensed help approaching. He yelled struggling like an enormous fish. Geralt buried his knees in the sorcerers chest raised his arm forming the Sign of Aard with his fingers and aimed at the flaming portal. It was a mistake.
No one emerged from the portal. Only power radiated from it and Rience had taken the power.
From the sorcerers outstretched fingers grew six-inch steel spikes. They dug into Geralts chest and shoulder with an audible crack. Energy exploded from the spikes. The witcher threw himself backwards in a convulsive leap. The shock was such that he felt and heard his teeth clenched in pain crunch and break. At least two of them.
Rience attempted to rise but immediately collapsed to his knees again and began to struggle to the portal on all fours. Geralt catching his breath with difficulty drew a stiletto from his boot. The sorcerer looked back sprang up and reeled. The witcher was also reeling but he was quicker. Rience looked back again and screamed. Geralt gripped the knife. He was angry. Very angry.
Something grabbed him from behind overpowered him immobilised him. The medallion on his neck pulsated acutely; the pain in his wounded shoulder throbbed spasmodically.
Some ten paces behind him stood Philippa Eilhart. From her raised arms emanated a dull light – two streaks two rays. Both were touching his back squeezing his arms with luminous pliers. He struggled in vain. He could not move from the spot. He could only watch as Rience staggered up to the portal which pulsated with a milky glow.
Rience in no hurry slowly stepped into the light of the portal sank into it like a diver blurred and disappeared. A second later the oval went out for a moment plunging the little street into impenetrable dense velvety blackness.
Somewhere in the lanes fighting cats yowled. Geralt looked at the blade of the sword he had picked up on his way towards the magician.
Why Philippa? Why did you do it?
The magician took a step back. She was still holding the knife which a moment earlier had penetrated Toublanc Michelets skull.
Why are you asking? You know perfectly well.
Yes he agreed. Now I know.
Youre wounded Geralt. You cant feel the pain because youre intoxicated with the witchers elixir but look how youre bleeding. Have you calmed down sufficiently for me to safely approach and take a look at you? Bloody hell dont look at me like that! And dont come near me. One more step and Ill be forced to… Dont come near me! Please! I dont want to hurt you but if you come near—
Philippa! shouted Dandilion still holding the weeping Shani. Have you gone mad?
No said the witcher with some effort. Shes quite sane. And knows perfectly well what shes doing. She knew all along what she was doing. She took advantage of us. Betrayed us. Deceived—
Calm down repeated Philippa Eilhart. You wont understand and you dont have to understand. I did what I had to do. And dont call me a traitor. Because I did this precisely so as not to betray a cause which is greater than you can imagine. A great and important cause so important that minor matters have to be sacrificed for it without second thoughts if faced with such a choice. Geralt damn it were nattering and youre standing in a pool of blood. Calm down and let Shani and me take care of you.
Shes right! shouted Dandilion youre wounded damn it! Your wound has to be dressed and weve got to get out of here! You can argue later!
You and your great cause… The witcher ignoring the troubadour staggered forward. Your great cause Philippa and your choice is a wounded man stabbed in cold blood once he told you what you wanted to know but what I wasnt to find out. Your great cause is Rience whom you allowed to escape so that he wouldnt by any chance reveal the name of his patron. So that he can go on murdering. Your great cause is those corpses which did not have to be. Sorry I express myself poorly. Theyre not corpses theyre minor matters!
I knew you wouldnt understand.
Indeed I dont. I never will. But I do know what its about. Your great causes your wars your struggle to save the world… Your end which justifies the means… Prick up your ears Philippa. Can you hear those voices that yowling? Those are cats fighting for a great cause. For indivisible mastery over a heap of rubbish. Its no joking matter – blood is being spilled and clumps of fur are flying. Its war. But I care incredibly little about either of these wars the cats or yours.
Thats only what you imagine hissed the magician. All this is going to start concerning you – and sooner than you think. Youre standing before necessity and choice. Youve got yourself mixed up in destiny my dear far more than youve bargained for. You thought you were taking a child a little girl into your care. You were wrong. Youve taken in a flame which could at any moment set the world alight. Our world. Yours mine that of the others. And you will have to choose. Like I did. Like Triss Merigold. Choose as your Yennefer had to. Because Yennefer has already chosen. Your destiny is in her hands witcher. You placed it in those hands yourself.
The witcher staggered. Shani yelled and tore herself away from Dandilion. Geralt held her back with a gesture stood upright and looked straight into the dark eyes of Philippa Eilhart.
My destiny he said with effort. My choice… Ill tell you Philippa what Ive chosen. I wont allow you to involve Ciri in your dirty machinations. I am warning you. Whoever dares harm Ciri will end up like those four lying there. I wont swear an oath. I have nothing by which to swear. I simply warn you. You accused me of being a bad guardian that I dont know how to protect the child. I will protect her. As best I can. I will kill. I will kill mercilessly…
I believe you said the magician with a smile. I believe you will. But not today Geralt. Not now. Because in a minute youre going to faint from loss of blood. Shani are you ready?
No one is born a wizard. We still know too little about genetics and the mechanisms of heredity. We sacrifice too little time and means on research. Unfortunately we constantly try to pass on inherited magical abilities in so to say a natural way. Results of these pseudo-experiments can be seen all too often in town gutters and within temple walls. We see too many of them and too frequently come across morons and women in a catatonic state dribbling seers who soil themselves seeresses village oracles and miracle-workers cretins whose minds are degenerate due to the inherited uncontrolled Force.
These morons and cretins can also have offspring can pass on abilities and thus degenerate further. Is anyone in a position to foresee or describe how the last link in such a chain will look?
Most of us wizards lose the ability to procreate due to somatic changes and dysfunction of the pituitary gland. Some wizards – usually women – attune to magic while still maintaining efficiency of the gonads. They can conceive and give birth – and have the audacity to consider this happiness and a blessing. But I repeat: no one is born a wizard. And no one should be born one! Conscious of the gravity of what I write I answer the question posed at the Congress in Cidaris. I answer most emphatically: each one of us must decide what she wants to be – a wizard or a mother.
I demand all apprentices be sterilised. Without exception.
Tissaia de Vries The Poisoned Source
CHAPTER SEVEN
Im going to tell you something said Iola the Second suddenly resting the basket of grain on her hip. Theres going to be a war. Thats what the dukes greeve who came to fetch the cheeses said.
A war? Ciri shoved her hair back from her forehead. With who? Nilfgaard?
I didnt hear the novice admitted. But the greeve said our duke had received orders from King Foltest himself. Hes sending out a call to arms and all the roads are swarming with soldiers. Oh dear! Whats going to happen?
If theres going to be a war said Eurneid then itll most certainly be with Nilfgaard. Who else? Again! Oh gods thats terrible!
Arent you exaggerating a bit with this war Iola? Ciri scattered some grains for the chickens and guinea-hens crowding around them in a busy noisy whirl. Maybe its only another raid on the Scoiatael?
Mother Nenneke asked the greeve the same thing declared Iola the Second. And the greeve said that no this time it wasnt about the Squirrels. Castles and citadels have apparently been ordered to store supplies in case of a siege. But elves attack in forests they dont lay siege to castles! The greeve asked whether the Temple could give more cheese and other things. For the castle stores. And he demanded goose feathers. They need a lot of goose feathers he said. For arrows. To shoot from bows understand? Oh gods! Were going to have masses of work! Youll see! Well be up to our ears in work!
Not all of us said Eurneid scathingly. Some arent going to get their little hands dirty. Some of us only work two days a week. They dont have any time for work because they are apparently studying witchery. But in actual fact theyre probably only idling or skipping around the park thrashing weeds with a stick. You know who Im talking about Ciri dont you?
Ciri will leave for the war no doubt giggled Iola the Second. After all she is apparently the daughter of a knight! And herself a great warrior with a terrible sword! At last shell be able to cut real heads off instead of nettles!
No she is a powerful wizard! Eurneid wrinkled her little nose. Shes going to change all our enemies into field mice. Ciri! Show us some amazing magic. Make yourself invisible or make the carrots ripen quicker. Or do something so that the chickens can feed themselves. Well go on dont make us ask! Cast a spell!
Magic isnt for show said Ciri angrily. Magic is not some street market trick.
But of course of course laughed the novice. Not for show. Eh Iola? Its exactly as if I were hearing that hag Yennefer talk!
Ciri is getting more and more like her appraised Iola sniffing ostentatiously. She even smells like her. Huh no doubt some magical scent made of mandrake or ambergris. Do you use magical scents Ciri?
No! I use soap! Something you rarely use!
Oh ho. Eurneid twisted her lips. What sarcasm what spite! And what airs!
She never used to be like this Iola the Second puffed up. She became like this when she started spending time with that witch. She sleeps with her eats with her doesnt leave her side. Shes practically stopped attending lessons at the Temple and no longer has a moment to spare for us!
And we have to do all the work for her! Both in the kitchen and in the garden! Look at her little hands Iola! Like a princess!
Thats the way it is! squeaked Ciri. Some have brains so they get a book! Others are feather-brained so they get a broom!
And you only use a broom for flying dont you? Pathetic wizard!
Youre stupid!
Stupid yourself!
No Im not!
Yes you are! Come on Iola dont pay any attention to her. Sorceresses are not our sort of company.
Of course they arent! yelled Ciri and threw the basket of grain on the ground. Chickens are your sort of company!
The novices turned up their noses and left passing through the horde of cackling fowl.
Ciri cursed loudly repeating a favourite saying of Vesemirs which she did not entirely understand. Then she added a few words she had heard Yarpen Zigrin use the meanings of which were a total mystery to her. With a kick she dispersed the chickens swarming towards the scattered grain picked up the basket turned it upside down then twirled in a witchers pirouette and threw the basket like a discus over the reed roof of the henhouse. She turned on her heel and set off through the Temple park at a run.
She ran lightly skilfully controlling her breath. At every other tree she passed she made an agile half-turn leap marking slashes with an imaginary sword and immediately following them with dodges and feints she had learned. She jumped deftly over the fence landing surely and softly on bent knees.
Jarre! she shouted turning her head up towards a window gaping in the stone wall of the tower. Jarre are you there? Hey! Its me!
Ciri? The boy leaned out. What are you doing here?
Can I come up and see you?
Now? Hmm… Well all right then… Please do.
She flew up the stairs like a hurricane catching the novice unexpectedly just as with his back turned he was quickly adjusting his clothes and hiding some parchments on the table under other parchments. Jarre ran his fingers through his hair cleared his throat and bowed awkwardly. Ciri slipped her thumbs into her belt and tossed her ashen fringe.
Whats this war everybodys talking about? she fired. I want to know!
Please have a seat.
She cast her eyes around the chamber. There were four large tables piled with large books and scrolls. There was only one chair. Also piled high.
War? mumbled Jarre. Yes Ive heard those rumours… Are you interested in it? You a g—? No dont sit on the table please Ive only just got all the documents in order… Sit on the chair. Just a moment wait Ill take those books… Does Lady Yennefer know youre here?
No.
Hmm… Or Mother Nenneke?
Ciri pulled a face. She knew what he meant. The sixteen-year-old Jarre was the high priestesss ward being prepared by her to be a cleric and chronicler. He lived in Ellander where he worked as a scribe at the municipal tribunal but he spent more time in Meliteles sanctuary than in the town studying copying and illuminating volumes in the Temple library for whole days and sometimes even nights. Ciri had never heard it from Nennekes lips but it was well known that the high priestess absolutely did not want Jarre to hang around her young novices. And vice-versa. But the novices however did sneak keen glances at the boy and chatted freely discussing the various possibilities presented by the presence on the Temple grounds of something which wore trousers. Ciri was amazed because Jarre was the exact opposite of everything which in her eyes should represent an attractive male. In Cintra as she remembered an attractive man was one whose head reached the ceiling whose shoulders were as broad as a doorway who swore like a dwarf roared like a buffalo and stank at thirty paces of horses sweat and beer regardless of what time of day or night it was. Men who did not correspond to this description were not recognised by Queen Calanthes chambermaids as worthy of sighs and gossip. Ciri had also seen a number of different men – the wise and gentle druids of Angren the tall and gloomy settlers of Sodden the witchers of Kaer Morhen. Jarre was different. He was as skinny as a stick-insect ungainly wore clothes which were too large and smelled of ink and dust always had greasy hair and on his chin instead of stubble there were seven or eight long hairs about half of which sprang from a large wart. Truly Ciri did not understand why she was so drawn to Jarres tower. She enjoyed talking to him the boy knew a great deal and she could learn much from him. But recently when he looked at her his eyes had a strange dazed and cloying expression.
Well. She grew impatient. Are you going to tell me or not?
Theres nothing to say. There isnt going to be any war. Its all gossip.
Aha she snorted. And so the duke is sending out a call to arms just for fun? The army is marching the highways out of boredom? Dont twist things Jarre. You visit the town and castle you must know something!
Why dont you ask Lady Yennefer about it?
Lady Yennefer has more important things to worry about! Ciri spat but then immediately had second thoughts smiled pleasantly and fluttered her eyelashes. Oh Jarre tell me please! Youre so clever! You can talk so beautifully and learnedly I could listen to you for hours! Please Jarre!
The boy turned red and his eyes grew unfocused and bleary. Ciri sighed surreptitiously.
Hmm… Jarre shuffled from foot to foot and moved his arms undecidedly evidently not knowing what to do with them. What can I tell you? Its true people are gossiping in town all excited by the events in Dol Angra… But there isnt going to be a war. Thats for sure. You can believe me.
Of course I can she snorted. But Id rather know what you base this certainty on. You dont sit on the dukes council as far as I know. And if you were made a voivode yesterday then do tell me about it. Ill congratulate you.
I study historical treatises Jarre turned crimson and one can learn more from them than sitting on a council. Ive read The History of War by Marshal Pelligram Duke de Ruyters Strategy Bronibors The Victorious Deeds of Redanias Gallant Cavalrymen… And I know enough about the present political situation to be able to draw conclusions through analogy. Do you know what an analogy is?
Of course lied Ciri picking a blade of grass from the buckle of her shoe.
If the history of past wars – the boy stared at the ceiling – were to be laid over present political geography it is easy to gauge that minor border incidents such as the one in Dol Angra are fortuitous and insignificant. You as a student of magic must no doubt be acquainted with the present political geography?
Ciri did not reply. Lost in thought she skimmed through the parchments lying on the table and turned a few pages of the huge leather-bound volume.
Leave that alone. Dont touch it. Jarre was worried. Its an exceptionally valuable and unique work.
Im not going to eat it.
Your hands are dirty.
Theyre cleaner than yours. Listen do you have any maps here?
I do but theyre hidden in the chest said the boy quickly but seeing Ciri pull a face he sighed pushed the scrolls of parchment off the chest lifted the lid and started to rummage through the contents. Ciri wriggling in the chair and swinging her legs carried on flicking through the book. From between the pages suddenly slipped a loose page with a picture of a woman completely naked with her hair curled into ringlets entangled in an embrace with a completely naked bearded man. Her tongue sticking out the girl spent a long time turning the etching around unable to make out which way up it should be. She finally spotted the most important detail in the picture and giggled. Jarre walking up with an enormous scroll under his arm blushed vioently took the etching from her without a word and hid it under the papers strewn across the table.
An exceptionally valuable and unique work she gibed. Are those the analogies youre studying? Are there any more pictures like that in there? Interesting the book is called Healing and Curing. Id like to know what diseases are cured that way.
You can read the First Runes? The boy was surprised and cleared his throat with embarrassment. I didnt know…
Theres still a lot you dont know. She turned up her nose. And what do you think? Im not just some novice feeding hens for eggs. I am… a wizard. Well go on. Show me that map!
They both knelt on the floor holding down the stiff sheet which was stubbornly trying to roll up again with their hands and knees. Ciri finally weighed down one corner with a chair leg and Jarre pressed another down with a hefty book entitled The Life and Deeds of Great King Radovid.
Hmm… This map is so unclear! I cant make head or tail of it… Where are we? Where is Ellander?
Here. He pointed. Here is Temeria this space. Here is Wyzima our King Foltests capital. Here in Pontar Valley lies the duchy of Ellander. And here… Yes here is our Temple.
And whats this lake? There arent any lakes around here.
That isnt a lake. Its an ink blot…
Ah. And here… This is Cintra. Is that right?
Yes. South of Transriver and Sodden. This way here flows the River Yaruga flowing into the sea right at Cintra. That country I dont know if you know is now dominated by the Nilfgaardians—
I do know she cut him short clenching her fist. I know very well. And where is this Nilfgaard? I cant see a country like that here. Doesnt it fit on this map of yours or what? Get me a bigger one!
Hmm… Jarre scratched the wart on his chin. I dont have any maps like that… But I do know that Nilfgaard is somewhere further towards the south… There more or less there. I think.
So far? Ciri was surprised her eyes fixed on the place on the floor which he indicated. Theyve come all the way from there? And on the way conquered those other countries?
Yes thats true. They conquered Metinna Maecht Nazair Ebbing all the kingdoms south of the Amell Mountains. Those kingdoms like Cintra and Upper Sodden the Nilfgaardians now call the Provinces. But they didnt manage to dominate Lower Sodden Verden and Brugge. Here on the Yaruga the armies of the Four Kingdoms held them back defeating them in battle—
I know I studied history. Ciri slapped the map with her open palm. Well Jarre tell me about the war. Were kneeling on political geography. Draw conclusions through analogy and through anything you like. Im all ears.
The boy blushed then started to explain pointing to the appropriate regions on the map with the tip of a quill.
At present the border between us and the South – dominated by Nilfgaard – is demarcated as you can see by the Yaruga River. It constitutes an obstacle which is practically insurmountable. It hardly ever freezes over and during the rainy season it can carry so much water that its bed is almost a mile wide. For a long stretch here it flows between precipitous inaccessible banks between the rocks of Mahakam…
The land of dwarves and gnomes?
Yes. And so the Yaruga can only be crossed here in its lower reaches in Sodden and here in its middle reaches in the valley of Dol Angra…
And it was exactly in Dol Angra that inci— Incident?
Wait. Im just explaining to you that at the moment no army could cross the Yaruga River. Both accessible valleys those along which armies have marched for centuries are very heavily manned and defended both by us and by Nilfgaard. Look at the map. Look how many strongholds there are. See here is Verden here is Brugge here the Isles of Skellige…
And this what is this? This huge white mark?
Jarre moved closer; she felt the warmth of his knee.
Brokilon Forest he said is forbidden territory. The kingdom of forest dryads. Brokilon also defends our flank. The dryads wont let anyone pass. The Nilfgaardians either…
Hmm… Ciri leaned over the map. Here is Aedirn… And the town of Vengerberg… Jarre! Stop that immediately!
The boy abruptly pulled his lips away from her hair and went as red as a beetroot.
I do not wish you to do that to me!
Ciri I—
I came to you with a serious matter as a wizard to a scholar she said icily and with dignity in a tone of voice which exactly copied that of Yennefer. So behave!
The scholar blushed an even deeper shade and had such a stupid expression on his face that the wizard could barely keep herself from laughing. He leaned over the map once more.
All this geography of yours she continued hasnt led to anything yet. Youre telling me about the Yaruga River but the Nilfgaardians have after all already crossed to the other side once. Whats stopping them now?
That time hawked Jarre wiping the sweat which had all of a sudden appeared on his brow they only had Brugge Sodden and Temeria against them. Now were united in an alliance. Like at the battle of Sodden. The Four Kingdoms. Temeria Redania Aedirn and Kaedwen…
Kaedwen said Ciri proudly. Yes I know what that alliance is based on. King Henselt of Kaedwen offers special secret aid to King Demawend of Aedirn. That aid is transported in barrels. And when King Demawend suspects someone of being a traitor he puts stones in the barrels. Sets a trap—
She broke off recalling that Geralt had forbidden her to mention the events in Kaedwen. Jarre stared at her suspiciously.
Is that so? And how can you know all that?
I read about it in a book written by Marshal Pelican she snorted. And in other analogies. Tell me what happened in Dol Angra or whatever its called. But first show me where it is.
Here. Dol Angra is a wide valley a route leading from the south to the kingdoms of Lyria and Rivia to Aedirn and further to Dol Blathanna and Kaedwen… And through Pontar Valley to us to Temeria.
And what happened there?
There was fighting. Apparently. I dont know much about it but thats what theyre saying at the castle.
If there was fighting frowned Ciri theres a war already! So what are you talking about?
Its not the first time theres been fighting clarified Jarre but the girl saw that he was less and less sure of himself. Incidents at the border are very frequent. But theyre insignificant.
And how come?
The forces are balanced. Neither we nor the Nilfgaardians can do anything. And neither of the sides can give their opponent a casus belli—
Give what?
A reason for war. Understand? Thats why the armed incidents in Dol Angra are most certainly fortuitous matters probably attacks by brigands or skirmishes with smugglers… In no way can they be the work of regular armies neither ours nor those of Nilfgaard… Because that would be precisely a casus belli…
Aha. Jarre tell me—
She broke off. She raised her head abruptly quickly touched her temples with her fingers and frowned.
Ive got to go she said. Lady Yennefer is calling me.
You can hear her? The boy was intrigued. At a distance? How…
Ive got to go she repeated getting to her feet and brushing the dust off her knees. Listen Jarre. Im leaving with Lady Yennefer on some very important matters. I dont know when well be back. I warn you they are secret matters which concern only wizards so dont ask any questions.
Jarre also stood up. He adjusted his clothing but still did not know what to do with his hands. His eyes glazed over sickeningly.
Ciri…
What?
I… I…
I dont know what youre talking about she said impatiently glaring at him with her huge emerald eyes. Nor do you obviously. Im off. Take care Jarre.
Goodbye… Ciri. Have a safe journey. Ill… Ill be thinking of you…
Ciri sighed.
Im here Lady Yennefer!
She flew into the chamber like a shot from a catapult and the door thumped open slamming against the wall. She could have broken her legs on the stool standing in her way but Ciri jumped over it deftly gracefully executed a half-pirouette feigning the slash of a sword and joyfully laughed at her successful trick. Despite running briskly she did not pant but breathed evenly and calmly. She had mastered breath control to perfection.
Im here! she repeated.
At last. Get undressed and into the tub. Quick.
The enchantress did not look round did not turn away from the table looked at Ciri in the mirror. Slowly. She combed her damp black curls which straightened under the pressure of the comb only to spring back a moment later into shiny waves.
The girl unbuckled her boots in a flash kicked them off freed herself of her clothes and with a splash landed in the tub. Grabbing the soap she started to energetically scrub her forearms.
Yennefer sat motionless staring at the window and toying with her comb. Ciri snorted spluttered and spat because soap had got into her mouth. She tossed her head wandering whether a spell existed which could make washing possible without water soap and wasting time.
The magician put the comb aside but lost in thought kept gazing through the window at the swarms of ravens and crows croaking horrifically as they flew east. On the table next to the mirror and an impressive array of bottled cosmetics lay several letters. Ciri knew that Yennefer had been waiting for them a long time and that the day on which they were to leave the Temple depended on her receiving these letters. In spite of what she had told Jarre the girl had no idea where and why they were leaving. But in those letters…
Splashing with her left hand so as to mislead she arranged the fingers of her right in a gesture concentrated on a formula fixed her eyes on the letters and sent out an impulse.
Dont you even dare said Yennefer without turning around.
I thought… She cleared her throat. I thought one of them might be from Geralt…
If it was Id have given it to you. The magician turned in her chair and sat facing her. Are you going to be long washing?
Ive finished.
Get up please.
Ciri obeyed. Yennefer smiled faintly.
Yes she said youve finished with childhood. Youve rounded out where necessary. Lower your hands. Im not interested in your elbows. Well well dont blush no false shyness. Its your body the most natural thing in the world. And the fact that youre developing is just as natural. If your fate had turned out differently… If it werent for the war youd have long been the wife of some duke or prince. You realise that dont you? Weve discussed matters concerning your gender often enough and in enough detail for you to know that youre already a woman. Physiologically that is to say. Surely youve not forgotten what we talked about?
No. I havent.
When you visit Jarre I hope there arent any problems with your memory either?
Ciri lowered her eyes but only momentarily. Yennefer did not smile.
Dry yourself and come here she said coolly. No splashing please.
Wrapped in a towel Ciri sat down on the small chair at the magicians knees. Yennefer brushed the girls hair every now and again snipping off a disobedient wisp with a pair of scissors.
Are you angry with me? asked the girl reluctantly. For for… going to the tower?
No. But Nenneke doesnt like it. You know that.
But I havent… I dont care about Jarre in the least. Ciri blushed a little. I only…
Exactly muttered the enchantress. You only. Dont play the child because youre not one any more let me remind you. That boy slobbers and stammers at the sight of you. Cant you see that?
Thats not my fault! What am I supposed to do?
Yennefer stopped combing Ciris hair and measured her with a deep violet gaze.
Dont toy with him. Its base.
But Im not toying with him! Im only talking to him!
Id like to believe the enchantress said as she snipped her scissors cutting yet another wisp of hair which would not allow itself to be styled for anything in the world that during these conversations you remember what I asked you.
I remember I remember!
Hes an intelligent and bright boy. One or two inadvertent words could lead him on the right track to matters he should know nothing about. No one absolutely no one must find out who you are.
I remember repeated Ciri. I havent squealed a word to anyone you can be sure of that. Tell me is that why we have to leave so suddenly? Are you afraid that someones going to find out Im here? Is that why?
No. There are other reasons.
Is it because… there might be a war? Everybodys talking about another war! Everybodys talking about it Lady Yennefer.
Indeed the magician confirmed coolly snipping her scissors just above Ciris ear. Its a subject which belongs to the so-called interminable category. Theres been talk about wars in the past there is talk now and there always will be. And not without reason – there have been wars and there will be wars. Lower your head.
Jarre said… that theres not going to be a war with Nilfgaard. He spoke of some sort of analogies… Showed me a map. I dont know what to think myself any more. I dont know what these analogies are probably something terribly clever… Jarre reads various learned books and knows it all but I think…
It interests me what you think Ciri.
In Cintra… That time… Lady Yennefer my grandmother was much cleverer than Jarre. King Eist was clever too. He sailed the seas saw everything even a narwhal and sea serpent and I bet he also saw many an analogy. And so what? Suddenly they appeared the Nilfgaardians…
Ciri raised her head and her voice stuck in her throat. Yennefer put her arms around her and hugged her tightly.
Unfortunately she said quietly unfortunately youre right my ugly one. If the ability to make use of experience and draw conclusions decided we would have forgotten what war is a long time ago. But those whose goal is war have never been held back nor will be by experience or analogy.
So… Its true after all. There is going to be a war. Is that why we have to leave?
Lets not talk about it. Lets not worry too soon.
Ciri sniffed.
Ive already seen a war she whispered. I dont want to see another. Never. I dont want to be alone again. I dont want to be frightened. I dont want to lose everything again like that time. I dont want to lose Geralt… or you Lady Yennefer. I dont want to lose you. I want to stay with you. And him. Always.
You will. The magicians voice trembled a little. And Im going to be with you Ciri. Always. I promise you.
Ciri sniffed again. Yennefer coughed quietly put down the scissors and comb got to her feet and crossed over to the window. The ravens were still croaking in their flight towards the mountains.
When I arrived here the lady magician suddenly said in her usual melodious slightly mocking voice. When we first met… You didnt like me.
Ciri did not say anything. Our first meeting she thought. I remember. I was in the Grotto with the other girls. Hrosvitha was showing us plants and herbs. Then Iola the First came in and whispered something in Hrosvithas ear. The priestess grimaced with animosity. And Iola the First came up to me with a strange expression on her face. Get yourself together Ciri she said and go the refectory quick. Mother Nenneke is summoning you. Someone has arrived.
Strange meaningful glances excitement in their eyes. And whispers. Yennefer. Magician Yennefer. Quick Ciri hurry up. Mother Nenneke is waiting. And she is waiting.
I knew immediately thought Ciri that it was her. Because Id seen her. Id seen her the night before. In my dream.
Her.
I didnt know her name then. She didnt say anything in my dream. She only looked at me and behind her in the darkness I saw a closed door…
Ciri sighed. Yennefer turned and the obsidian star on her neck glittered with a thousand reflections.
Youre right admitted the girl seriously looking straight into the magicians violet eyes. I didnt like you.
Ciri said Nenneke come closer. This is Lady Yennefer from Vengerberg Mistress of Wizardry. Dont be frightened. Lady Yennefer knows who you are. You can trust her.
The girl bowed interlocking her palms in a gesture of full respect. The enchantress rustling her long black dress approached took Ciri by the chin and quite off-handedly lifted her head turning it right and left. The girl felt anger and rebellion rising within her – she was not used to being treated this way. And at the same time she experienced a burning envy. Yennefer was very beautiful. Compared to the delicate pale and rather common comeliness of the priestesses and novices who Ciri saw every day the magician glowed with a conscious even demonstrative loveliness emphasised and accentuated in every detail. Her raven-black locks cascading down her shoulders shone reflected the light like the feathers of a peacock curling and undulating with every move. Ciri suddenly felt ashamed ashamed of her grazed elbows chapped hands broken nails her ashen stringy hair. All of a sudden she had an overwhelming desire to possess what Yennefer had – a beautiful exposed neck and on it a lovely black velvet ribbon with a lovely glittering star. Regular eyebrows accentuated with charcoal and long eyelashes. Proud lips. And those two mounds which rose with every breath hugged by black cloth and white lace…
So this is the famous Surprise. The magician twisted her lips a little. Look me in the eyes girl.
Ciri shuddered and hunched her shoulders. No she did not envy Yennefer that one thing – did not desire to have it or even look at it. Those eyes violet deep as a fathomless lake strangely bright dispassionate and malefic. Terrifying.
The magician turned towards the stout high priestess. The star on her neck flamed with reflections of the sun beaming through the window into the refectory.
Yes Nenneke she said. There can be no doubt. One just has to look into those green eyes to know that there is something in her. High forehead regular arch of the brows eyes set attractively apart. Narrow nose. Long fingers. Rare hair pigment. Obvious elven blood although there is not much of it in her. An elven great-grandfather or great-grandmother. Have I guessed correctly?
I dont know her family tree the high priestess replied calmly. It didnt interest me.
Tall for her age continued the magician still appraising Ciri with her eyes. The girl was boiling over with fury and annoyance struggling with an overpowering desire to scream defiantly scream her lungs out stamp her feet and run off to the park on the way knocking over the vase on the table and slamming the door so as to make the plaster crumble from the ceiling.
Not badly developed. Yennefer did not take her eyes off her. Has she suffered any infectious diseases in childhood? Ha no doubt you didnt ask her about that either. Has she been ill since shes been here?
No.
Any migraines? Fainting? Inclination to catch cold? Painful periods?
No. Only those dreams.
I know. Yennefer gathered the hair from her cheek. He wrote about that. It appears from his letter that in Kaer Morhen they didnt try out any of their… experiments on her. I would like to believe thats true.
It is. They gave her only natural stimulants.
Stimulants are never natural! The magician raised her voice. Never! It is precisely the stimulants which may have aggravated her symptoms in… Damn it I never suspected him of such irresponsibility!
Calm down. Nenneke looked at her coldly and all of a sudden somehow oddly without respect. I said they were natural and absolutely safe. Forgive me dear but in this respect I am a greater authority than you. I know it is exceedingly difficult for you to accept someone elses authority but in this case I am forced to inflict it on you. And let there be no more talk about it.
As you wish. Yennefer pursed her lips. Well come on girl. We dont have much time. It would be a sin to waste it.
Ciri could barely keep her hands from shaking; she swallowed hard and looked inquiringly at Nenneke. The high priestess was serious as if sad and the smile with which she answered the unspoken question was unpleasantly false.
Youre going with Lady Yennefer now she said. Lady Yennefer is going to be looking after you for a while.
Ciri bowed her head and clenched her teeth.
You are no doubt baffled continued Nenneke that a Mistress of Wizardry is suddenly taking you into her care. But you are a reasonable girl Ciri. You can guess why. You have inherited certain… attributes from your ancestors. You know what I am talking about. You used to come to me after those dreams after the nocturnal disturbances in the dormitory. I couldnt help you. But Lady Yennefer—
Lady Yennefer interrupted the magician will do what is necessary. Let us go girl.
Go nodded Nenneke trying in vain to make her smile at least appear natural. Go child. Remember it is a great privilege to have someone like Lady Yennefer look after you. Dont bring shame on the Temple and us your mentors. And be obedient.
Ill escape tonight Ciri made up her mind. Back to Kaer Morhen. Ill steal a horse from the stables and thats the last theyll see of me. Ill run away!
Indeed you will said the magician under her breath.
I beg your pardon? the priestess raised her head. What did you say?
Nothing nothing smiled Yennefer. You just thought I did. Or maybe I thought I did? Just look at this ward of yours Nenneke. Furious as a cat. Sparks in her eyes; just wait and shell hiss. And if she could flatten her ears she would. A witcher-girl! Ill have to take her firmly in hand file her claws.
Be more understanding. The high priestesss features visibly hardened. Please be kind-hearted and understanding. She really is not who you take her to be.
What do you mean by that?
Shes not your rival Yennefer.
For a moment they measured each other with their eyes the enchantress and the priestess and Ciri felt the air quiver a strange terrible force between them growing in strength. This lasted no more than a fraction of a second after which the force disappeared and Yennefer burst out laughing lightheartedly and sweetly.
I forgot she said. Always on his side arent you Nenneke? Always worrying about him. Like the mother he never had.
And youre always against him smiled the priestess. Bestowing him with strong feelings as usual. And defending yourself as hard as you can not to call the feelings by their rightful name.
Once again Ciri felt fury rise up somewhere in the pit of her stomach and her temples throbbed with spite and rebellion. She remembered how many times and under what circumstances she had heard that name. Yennefer. A name which caused unease a name which was the symbol of some sinister secret. She guessed what that secret was.
Theyre talking quite openly in front of me without any restraint she thought feeling her hands start to shake with anger once more. Theyre not bothered about me at all. Ignoring me completely. As if I were a child. Theyre talking about Geralt in front of me in my presence but they cant because I… I am…
Who?
You on the other hand Nenneke retorted the magician are amusing yourself as usual analysing other peoples emotions and on top of that interpreting them to suit yourself!
And putting my nose into other peoples business?
I didnt want to say that. Yennefer tossed her black locks which gleamed and writhed like snakes. Thank you for doing so for me. And now let us change the subject please because the one we were discussing is exceptionally silly – disgraceful in front of our young pupil. And as for being understanding as you ask… I will be. But kind-hearted – with that there might be a problem because after all it is widely thought I dont possess any such organ. But well manage somehow. Isnt that right Surprise?
She smiled at Ciri and despite herself despite her anger and annoyance Ciri had to respond with a smile. Because the enchantresss smile was unexpectedly pleasant friendly and sincere. And very very beautiful.
She listened to Yennefers speech with her back ostentatiously turned pretending to bestow her full attention on the bumble bee buzzing in the flower of one of the hollyhocks growing by the temple wall.
No one asked me about it she mumbled.
What didnt anybody ask you about?
Ciri turned in a half-pirouette and furiously whacked the hollyhock with her fist. The bumble bee flew away buzzing angrily and ominously.
No one asked me whether I wanted you to teach me!
Yennefer rested her fists on her hips; her eyes flashed.
What a coincidence she hissed. Imagine that – no one asked me whether I wanted to teach you either. Besides wanting has got nothing to do with it. I dont apprentice just anybody and you despite appearances might still turn out to be a nobody. I was asked to check how things stand with you. To examine what is inside you and how that could endanger you. And I though not unreluctantly agreed.
But I havent agreed yet!
The magician raised her arm and moved her hand. Ciri experienced a throbbing in her temples and a buzzing in her ears as if she were swallowing but much louder. She felt drowsy and an overpowering weakness tiredness stiffened her neck and softened her knees.
Yennefer lowered her hand and the sensation instantly passed.
Listen to me carefully Surprise she said. I can easily cast a spell on you hypnotise you or put you in a trance. I can paralyse you force you to drink an elixir strip you naked lay you out on the table and examine you for hours taking breaks for meals while you lie there looking at the ceiling unable to move even your eyeballs. That is what I would do with just any snotty kid. I do not want to do that to you because one can see at first glance that you are an intelligent and proud girl that you have character. I dont want to put you or myself to shame. Not in front of Geralt. Because he is the one who asked me to take care of your abilities. To help you deal with them.
He asked you? Why? He never said anything to me! He never asked me—
You keep going back to that cut in the magician. No one asked for your opinion no one took the trouble to check what you want or dont want. Could you have given cause for someone to consider you a contrary stubborn snotty kid whom it is not worth asking questions like that? But Im going to take the risk and am going to ask something no one has ever asked you. Will you allow yourself to be examined?
And what will it involve? What are these tests? And why…
I have already explained. If you havent understood thats too bad. I have no intention of polishing your perception or working on your intelligence. I can examine a sensible girl just as well as a stupid one.
Im not stupid! And I understood everything!
All the better.
But Im not cut out to be a magician! I havent got any abilities! Im never going to be a magician nor want to be one! Im destined for Geralt… Im destined to be a witcher! Ive only come here for a short period! Im going back to Kaer Morhen soon…
You are persistently staring at my neckline said Yennefer icily narrowing her violet eyes a little. Do you see anything unusual there or is it just plain jealousy?
That star… muttered Ciri. Whats it made of? Those stones move and shine so strangely…
They pulsate smiled the magician. They are active diamonds sunken in obsidian. Do you want to see them close up? Touch them?
Yes… No! Ciri backed away and angrily tossed her head trying to dispel the faint scent of lilac and gooseberries emanating from Yennefer. I dont. Why should I? Im not interested! Not a bit! Im a witcher! I havent got any magical abilities! Im not cut out to be a magician surely thats clear because Im… And anyway…
The magician sat on the stone bench under the wall and concentrated on examining her fingernails.
…and anyway concluded Ciri Ive got to think about it.
Come here. Sit next to me.
She obeyed.
Ive got to have time to think about it she said hesitantly.
Quite right. Yennefer nodded still gazing at her nails. It is a serious matter. It needs to be thought over.
Both said nothing for a while. The novices strolling through the park glanced at them with curiosity whispered giggled.
Well?
Well what?
Have you thought about it?
Ciri leaped to her feet snorted and stamped.
I… I… she panted unable to catch her breath from anger. Are you making fun of me? I need time! I need to think about it! For longer! For a whole day… And night!
Yennefer looked her in the eyes and Ciri shrivelled under the gaze.
The saying goes said the magician slowly that the night brings solutions. But in your case Surprise the only thing night can bring is yet another nightmare. You will wake up again screaming and in pain drenched in sweat. You will be frightened again frightened of what you saw frightened of what you wont be able to remember. And there will be no more sleep that night. There will be fear. Until dawn.
The girl shuddered lowered her head.
Surprise. Yennefers voice changed imperceptibly. Trust me.
The enchantresss shoulder was warm. The black velvet of her dress asked to be touched. The scent of lilac and gooseberries intoxicated delightfully. Her embrace calmed and soothed relaxed tempered excitement stilled anger and rebellion.
Youll submit to the tests Surprise.
I will she answered understanding that she did not really have to reply. Because it was not a question.
I dont understand anything any more said Ciri. First you say Ive got abilities because Ive got those dreams. But you want to do tests and check… So how is it? Do I have abilities or dont I?
That question will be answered by the tests.
Tests tests. She pulled a face. I havent got any abilities I tell you. Id know if I had them wouldnt I? Well but… If by some sheer chance I had abilities what then?
There are two possibilities the magician informed her with indifference as she opened the window. Your abilities will either have to be extinguished or you will have to learn how to control them. If you are gifted and want to I can try to instil in you some elementary knowledge of magic.
What does elementary mean?
Basic.
They were alone in the large chamber next to the library in an unoccupied side wing of the building which Nenneke had allocated to the lady magician. Ciri knew that this chamber was used by guests. She knew that Geralt whenever he visited the Temple stayed right here.
Are you going to want to teach me? She sat on the bed and skimmed her hand over the damask eiderdown. Are you going to want to take me away from here? Im never going to leave with you!
So Ill leave alone said Yennefer coldly untying the straps of her saddle-bags. And I assure you Im not going to miss you. I did tell you that Ill educate you only if you decide you want to. And I can do so here on the spot.
How long are you going to edu— Teach me for?
As long as you want. The magician leaned over opened the chest of drawers pulled out an old leather bag a belt two boots trimmed with fur and a clay demi-john in a wicker basket. Ciri heard her curse under her breath while smiling and saw her hide the finds back in the drawers. She guessed whose they were. Who had left them there.
What does that mean as long as I want? she asked. If I get bored or dont like the work—
Well put an end to it. Its enough that you tell me. Or show me.
Show you? How?
Should we decide on educating you I will demand absolute obedience. I repeat: absolute. If on the other hand you get tired of it it will suffice for you to disobey. Then the lessons will instantly cease. Is that clear?
Ciri nodded and cast a fleeting glance of her green eyes at the magician.
Secondly continued Yennefer unpacking her saddle-bags I will demand absolute sincerity. You will not be allowed to hide anything from me. Anything. So if you feel you have had enough it will suffice for you to lie pretend feign or close in on yourself. If I ask you something and you do not answer sincerely that will also indicate an instant end to our lessons. Have you understood?
Yes muttered Ciri. And that… sincerity… Does that work both ways? Will I be able to… ask you questions?
Yennefer looked at her and her lips twisted strangely.
Of course she answered after a while. That goes without saying. That will be the basis of the learning and protection I aim to give you. Sincerity works both ways. You are to ask me questions. At any time. And I will answer. Sincerely.
Any question?
Any question.
As of now?
Yes. As of now.
What is there between you and Geralt Lady Yennefer?
Ciri almost fainted horrified at her own impertinence chilled by the silence which followed the question.
The enchantress slowly approached her placed her hands on her shoulders looked her in the eyes from up close – and deeply.
Longing she answered gravely. Regret. Hope. And fear. Yes I dont think I have omitted anything. Well now we can get on with the tests you little green-eyed viper. We will see if youre cut out for this. Although after your question I would be very surprised if it turned out you arent. Lets go my ugly one.
Ciri bridled.
Why do you call me that?
Yennefer smiled with the corners of her lips.
I promised to be sincere.
Ciri annoyed pulled herself up straight and wriggled in her hard chair which after many hours of sitting hurt her backside.
Nothings going to come of it! she snarled wiping her charcoal-smeared fingers on the table. After all this nothing… Nothing works out for me! Im not cut out to be a magician! I knew that right from the start but you didnt want to listen to me! You didnt pay any attention!
Yennefer raised her eyebrows.
I didnt want to listen to you you say? Thats interesting. I usually devote my attention to every sentence uttered in my presence and note it in my memory. The one condition being that there be at least a little sense in the sentence.
Youre always mocking me. Ciri grated her teeth. And I just wanted to tell you… Well about these abilities. You see in Kaer Morhen in the mountains… I couldnt form a single witcher Sign. Not one!
I know.
You know?
I know. But that doesnt mean anything.
Hows that? Well… But thats not all!
Im listening in suspense.
Im not cut out for it. Cant you understand that? Im… Im too young.
I was younger than you when I started.
But Im sure you werent…
What do you mean girl? Stop stuttering! At least one full sentence please.
Because… Ciri lowered her head and blushed. Because Iola Myrrha Eurneid and Katye – when we were having dinner – laughed at me and said that witchcraft doesnt have access to me and that Im not going to perform any magic because… Because Im… a virgin that means—
I know what it means believe it or not interrupted the magician. No doubt youll see this as another spiteful piece of mockery but I hate to tell you that you are talking a lot of rubbish. Let us get back to the test.
Im a virgin! repeated Ciri aggressively. Why the tests? Virgins cant do magic!
I cant see a solution Yennefer leaned back in her chair. So go out and lose your virginity if it gets in your way so much. But be quick about it if you please.
Are you making fun of me?
Youve noticed? The magician smiled faintly. Congratulations. Youve passed the preliminary test in perspicacity. And now for the real test. Concentrate please. Look: there are four pine trees in this picture. Each one has a different number of branches. Draw a fifth to fit in with the other four and to fit in this space here.
Pine trees are silly decreed Ciri sticking out her tongue and drawing a slightly crooked tree with her charcoal. And boring! I cant understand what pine trees have to do with magic? What? Lady Yennefer! You promised to answer my questions!
Unfortunately sighed the magician picking up the sheet of paper and critically appraising the drawing I think Im going to regret that promise. What do pine trees have in common with magic? Nothing. But youve drawn it correctly and on time. In truth excellent for a virgin.
Are you laughing at me?
No. I rarely laugh. I really need to have a good reason to laugh. Concentrate on the next page Surprise. There are rows of stars circles crosses and triangles drawn on it a different number of each shape in each row. Think and answer: how many stars should there be in the last row?
Stars are silly!
How many?
Three!
Yennefer did not say anything for a long time. She stared at a detail on the carved wardrobe door known only to her. The mischievous smile on Ciris lips started slowly to disappear until finally it disappeared altogether without a trace.
No doubt you were curious to learn said the magician very slowly not ceasing to admire the wardrobe what would happen if you gave me a senseless and stupid reply. You thought perhaps that I might not notice because I am not in the least interested in your answers? You thought wrongly. You believed perhaps that I would simply accept that you are stupid? You were wrong. But if you are bored of being tested and wanted for a change to test me… Well that has clearly worked hasnt it? Either way this test is concluded. Return the paper.
Im sorry Lady Yennefer. The girl lowered her head. There should of course be… one star there. Im very sorry. Please dont be angry with me.
Look at me Ciri.
The girl raised her eyes astonished. Because for the first time the magician had called her by her name.
Ciri said Yennefer. Know that despite appearances I get angry just as rarely as I laugh. You havent made me angry. But in apologising you have proved I wasnt wrong about you. And now take the next sheet of paper. As you can see there are five houses on it. Draw the sixth…
Again? I really cant understand why—
…the sixth house. The lady magicians voice changed dangerously and her eyes flashed with a violet glow. Here in this space. Dont make me repeat myself please.
After apples pine trees stars fishes and houses came the turn of labyrinths through which she had to quickly find a path wavy lines blots which looked like squashed cockroaches and mosaics which made her go cross-eyed and set her head spinning. Then there was a shining ball on a piece of string at which she had to stare for a long time. Staring at it was as dull as dish-water and Ciri kept falling asleep. Yennefer surprisingly did not care even though a few days earlier she had scolded her grimly for napping over one of the cockroach blots.
Poring over the tests had made her neck and back ache and day by day they grew more painful. She missed movement and fresh air and obliged to be sincere she immediately told Yennefer. The magician took it easily as if she had been expecting this for a long time.
For the next two days they both ran through the park jumped over ditches and fences under the amused or pitying eyes of the priestesses and novices. They exercised and practised their balance walking along the top of the wall which encircled the orchard and farm buildings. Unlike the training in Kaer Morhen though the exercises with Yennefer were always accompanied by theory. The magician taught Ciri how to breathe guiding the movement of her chest and diaphragm with strong pressure from her hand. She explained the rules of movement how muscles and bones work and demonstrated how to rest release tension and relax.
During one such session of relaxation stretched out on the grass and gazing at the sky Ciri asked a question which was bothering her. Lady Yennefer? When are we finally going to finish the tests?
Do they bore you so much?
No… But Id like to know whether Im cut out to be a magician.
You are.
You know that already?
I knew from the start. Few people can detect the activity of my star. Very few. You noticed it straight away.
And the tests?
Concluded. I already know what I wanted to about you.
But some of the tasks… They didnt work out very well. You said yourself that… Are you really sure? Youre not mistaken? Youre sure I have the ability?
Im sure.
But—
Ciri. The enchantress looked both amused and impatient. From the moment we lay down in the meadow I have been talking to you without using my voice. Its called telepathy remember that. And as you no doubt noticed it has not made our talking together any more difficult.
Magic – Yennefer her eyes fixed on the sky above the hills rested her hands on the pommel of her saddle – is in some peoples opinion the embodiment of Chaos. It is a key capable of opening the forbidden door. The door behind which lurk nightmares fear and unimaginable horrors behind which enemies hide and wait destructive powers the forces of pure Evil capable of annihilating not only the one who opens the door but with them the entire world. And since there is no lack of those who try to open the door someone at some point is going to make a mistake and then the destruction of the world will be forejudged and inevitable. Magic is therefore the revenge and the weapon of Chaos. The fact that following the Conjunction of the Spheres people have learned to use magic is the curse and undoing of the world. The undoing of mankind. And thats how it is Ciri. Those who believe that magic is Chaos are not mistaken.
Spurred on by its mistresss heels the magicians black stallion neighed lengthily and slowly made his way into the heather. Ciri hastened her horse followed in Yennefers tracks and caught up with her. The heather reached to their stirrups.
Magic Yennefer continued after a while is in some peoples opinion art. Great elitist art capable of creating beautiful and extraordinary things. Magic is a talent granted to only a chosen few. Others deprived of talent can only look at the results of the artists works with admiration and envy can admire the finished work while feeling that without these creations and without this talent the world would be a poorer place. The fact that following the Conjunction of the Spheres some chosen few discovered talent and magic within themselves the fact that they found Art within themselves is the blessing of beauty. And thats how it is. Those who believe that magic is art are also right.
On the long bare hill which protruded from the heath like the back of some lurking predator lay an enormous boulder supported by a few smaller stones. The magician guided her horse in its direction without pausing her lecture.
There are also those according to whom magic is a science. In order to master it talent and innate ability alone are not enough. Years of keen study and arduous work are essential; endurance and self-discipline are necessary. Magic acquired like this is knowledge learning the limits of which are constantly stretched by enlightened and vigorous minds by experience experiments and practice. Magic acquired in such a way is progress. It is the plough the loom the watermill the smelting furnace the winch and the pulley. It is progress evolution change. It is constant movement. Upwards. Towards improvement. Towards the stars. The fact that following the Conjunction of the Spheres we discovered magic will one day allow us to reach the stars. Dismount Ciri.
Yennefer approached the monolith placed her palm on the coarse surface of the stone and carefully brushed away the dust and dry leaves.
Those who consider magic to be a science she continued are also right. Remember that Ciri. And now come here to me.
The girl swallowed and came closer. The enchantress put her arm around her.
Remember she repeated magic is Chaos Art and Science. It is a curse a blessing and progress. It all depends on who uses magic how they use it and to what purpose. And magic is everywhere. All around us. Easily accessible. It is enough to stretch out ones hand. See? Im stretching out my hand.
The cromlech trembled perceptibly. Ciri heard a dull distant noise and a rumble coming from within the earth. The heather undulated flattened by the gale which suddenly gusted across the hill. The sky abruptly turned dark covered with clouds scudding across it at incredible speed. The girl felt drops of rain on her face. She narrowed her eyes against the flash of lightning which suddenly flared across the horizon. She automatically huddled up to the enchantress against her black hair smelling of lilac and gooseberries.
The earth which we tread. The fire which does not go out within it. The water from which all life is born and without which life is not possible. The air we breathe. It is enough to stretch out ones hand to master them to subjugate them. Magic is everywhere. It is in air in water in earth and in fire. And it is behind the door which the Conjunction of the Spheres has closed on us. From there from behind the closed door magic sometimes extends its hand to us. For us. You know that dont you? You have already felt the touch of that magic the touch of the hand from behind that door. That touch filled you with fear. Such a touch fills everyone with fear. Because there is Chaos and Order Good and Evil in all of us. But it is possible and necessary to control it. This has to be learnt. And you will learn it Ciri. That is why I brought you here to this stone which from time immemorial has stood at the crossing of veins of power pulsating with force. Touch it.
The boulder shook vibrated and with it the entire hill vibrated and shook.
Magic is extending its hand towards you Ciri. To you strange girl Surprise Child of the Elder Blood the Blood of Elves. Strange girl woven into Movement and Change into Annihilation and Rebirth. Destined and destiny. Magic extends its hand towards you from behind the closed door towards you a tiny grain of sand in the workings of the Clock of Fate. Chaos extends its talons towards you still uncertain if you will be its tool or an obstacle in its design. That which Chaos shows you in your dreams is this very uncertainty. Chaos is afraid of you Child of Destiny. But it wants you to be the one who feels fear.
There was a flash of lightning and a long rumble of thunder. Ciri trembled with cold and dread.
Chaos cannot show you what it really is. So it is showing you the future showing you what is going to happen. It wants you to be afraid of the coming days so that fear of what is going to happen to you and those closest to you will start to guide you take you over completely. That is why Chaos is sending you those dreams. Now you are going to show me what you see in your dreams. And you are going to be frightened. And then you will forget and master your fear. Look at my star Ciri. Dont take your eyes from it!
A flash. A rumble of thunder.
Speak! I command you!
Blood. Yennefers lips cut and crushed move silently flow with blood. White rocks flitter past seen from a gallop. A horse neighs. A leap. Valley abyss. Screaming. Flight an endless flight. Abyss…
In the depth of the abyss smoke. Stairs leading down.
Vaesse deireádh aep eigean… Something is coming to an end… What?
Elaine blath Feainnewedd… Child of the Elder Blood? Yennefers voice seems to come from somewhere afar is dull awakens echoes amidst the stone walls dripping with damp. Elaine blath—
Speak!
The violet eyes shine burn in the emaciated shrivelled face blackened with suffering veiled with a tempest of dishevelled dirty black hair. Darkness. Damp. Stench. The excruciating cold of stone walls. The cold of iron on wrists on ankles…
Abyss. Smoke. Stairs leading down. Stairs down which she must go. Must because… Because something is coming to an end. Because Tedd Deireádh the Time of End the Time of the Wolfs Blizzard is approaching. The Time of the White Chill and White Light…
The Lion Cub must die! For reasons of state!
Lets go says Geralt. Down the stairs. We must. It must be so. There is no other way. Only the stairs. Down!
His lips are not moving. They are blue. Blood blood everywhere… The whole stairs in blood… Mustnt slip… Because the witcher trips just once… The flash of a blade. Screams. Death. Down. Down the stairs.
Smoke. Fire. Frantic galloping hooves thundering. Flames all around. Hold on! Hold on Lion Cub of Cintra!
The black horse neighs rears. Hold on!
The black horse dances. In the slit of the helmet adorned with the wings of a bird of prey shine and burn merciless eyes.
A broad sword reflecting the glow of the fire falls with a hiss. Dodge Ciri! Feign! Pirouette parry! Dodge! Dodge! Too sloooowwww!
The blow blinds her with its flash shakes her whole body the pain paralyses her for a moment dulls deadens and then suddenly explodes with a terrible strength sinks its cruel sharp fangs into her cheek yanks penetrates right through radiates into the neck the shoulders chest lungs…
Ciri!
She felt the coarse unpleasant still coolness of stone on her back and head. She did not remember sitting down. Yennefer was kneeling next to her. Gently but decisively she straightened her fingers pulled her hand away from her cheek. The cheek throbbed pulsated with pain.
Mama… groaned Ciri. Mama… How it hurts! Mama…
The magician touched her face. Her hand was as cold as ice. The pain stopped instantly.
I saw… the girl whispered closing her eyes the things I saw in the dreams… A black knight… Geralt… And also… You… I saw you Lady Yennefer!
I know.
I saw you… I saw how—
Never more. You will never see that again. You wont dream about it any more. I will give you the force to push those nightmares away. That is why I have brought you here Ciri – to show you that force. Tomorrow I am going to start giving it to you.
Long arduous days followed days of intensive study and exhausting work. Yennefer was firm frequently stern sometimes masterfully formidable. But she was never boring. Previously Ciri could barely keep her eyes open in the Temple school and would sometimes even doze off during a lesson lulled by the monotonous gentle voice of Nenneke Iola the First Hrosvitha or some other teacher. With Yennefer it was impossible. And not only because of the timbre of the lady magicians voice and the short sharply accentuated sentences she used. The most important element was the subject of her studies. The study of magic. Fascinating exciting and absorbing study.
Ciri spent most of the day with Yennefer. She returned to the dormitory late at night collapsed into bed like a log and fell asleep immediately. The novices complained that she snored very loudly and tried to wake her. In vain.
Ciri slept deeply.
With no dreams.
Oh gods. Yennefer sighed in resignation and ruffling her black hair with both hands lowered her head. But its so simple! If you cant master this move what will happen with the harder ones?
Ciri turned away mumbled something in a raspy voice and massaged her stiff hand. The magician sighed once more.
Take another look at the etching. See how your fingers should be spread. Pay attention to the explanatory arrows and runes describing how the move should be performed.
Ive already looked at the drawing a thousand times! I understand the runes! Vort cáelme. Ys veloë. Away from oneself slowly. Down quickly. The hand… like this?
And the little finger?
Its impossible to position it like that without bending the ring finger at the same time!
Give me your hand.
Ouuuch!
Not so loud Ciri otherwise Nenneke will come running again thinking that Im skinning you alive or frying you in oil. Dont change the position of your fingers. And now perform the gesture. Turn turn the wrist! Good. Now shake the hand relax the fingers. And repeat. No no! Do you know what you did? If you were to cast a real spell like that youd be wearing your hand in splints for a month! Are your hands made of wood?
My hands trained to hold a sword! Thats why!
Nonsense. Geralt has been brandishing his sword for his whole life and his fingers are agile and… mmmm… very gentle. Continue my ugly one try again. See? Its enough to want to. Its enough to try. Once more. Good. Shake your hand. And once again. Good. Are you tired?
A little…
Let me massage your hand and arm. Ciri why arent you using the ointment I gave you? Your hands are as rough as crocodile skin… But whats this? A mark left by a ring am I right? Was I imagining it or did I forbid you to wear any jewellery?
But I won the ring from Myrrha playing spinning tops! And I only wore it for half a day—
Thats half a day too long. Dont wear it any more please.
I dont understand why arent I allowed—
You dont have to understand the magician said cutting her short but there was no anger in her voice. Im asking you not to wear any ornaments like that. Pin a flower in your hair if you want to. Weave a wreath for your hair. But no metal no crystals no stones. Its important Ciri. When the time comes I will explain why. For the time being trust me and do as I ask.
You wear your star earrings and rings! And Im not allowed? Is that because Im… a virgin?
Ugly one Yennefer smiled and stroked her on the head are you still obsessed with that? I have already explained to you that it doesnt matter whether you are or not. Not in the least. Wash your hair tomorrow; it needs it I see.
Lady Yennefer?
Yes.
May I… As part of the sincerity you promised… May I ask you something?
You may. But by all the gods not about virginity please.
Ciri bit her lip and did not say anything for a long time.
Too bad sighed Yennefer. Let it be. Ask away.
Because you see… Ciri blushed and licked her lips the girls in the dormitory are always gossiping and telling all sorts of stories… About Belleteyns feast and others like that… And they say Im a snotty kid a child because its time… Lady Yennefer how does it really work? How can one know that the time has come…
…to go to bed with a man?
Ciri blushed a deep shade of crimson. She said nothing for a while then raised her eyes and nodded.
Its easy to tell said Yennefer naturally. If you are beginning to think about it then its a sign the time has come.
But I dont want to!
Its not compulsory. You dont want to then you dont.
Ah. Ciri bit her lip again. And that… Well… Man… How can you tell its the right one to…
…go to bed with?
Mmmh.
If you have any choice at all the enchantress twisted her lips in a smile but dont have much experience you first appraise the bed.
Ciris emerald eyes turned the shape and size of saucers.
Hows that… The bed?
Precisely that. Those who dont have a bed at all you eliminate on the spot. From those who remain you eliminate the owners of any dirty or slovenly beds. And when only those who have clean and tidy beds remain you choose the one you find most attractive. Unfortunately the method is not a hundred per cent foolproof. You can make a terrible mistake.
Youre joking?
No. Im not joking Ciri. As of tomorrow you are going to sleep here with me. Bring your things. From what I hear too much time is wasted in the novices dormitory on gabbling time which would be better spent resting and sleeping.
After mastering the basic positions of the hands the moves and gestures Ciri began to learn spells and their formulae. The formulae were easier. Written in Elder Speech which the girl already knew to perfection they sank easily into her memory. Nor did she have any problems enunciating the frequently complicated intonations. Yennefer was clearly pleased and from day to day was becoming more pleasant and sympathetic. More and more frequently taking breaks in the studies both gossiped and joked about any old thing; both even began to amuse themselves by delicately poking fun at Nenneke who often visited their lectures and exercises – bristling and puffed up like a brooding hen – ready to take Ciri under her protective wing to protect and save her from the magicians imagined severity and the inhuman tortures of her education.
Obeying instructions Ciri moved to Yennefers chamber. Now they were together not only by day but also by night. Sometimes their studies would take place during the night – certain moves formulae and spells could not be performed in daylight.
The magician pleased with the girls progress slowed the speed of her education. They had more free time. They spent their evenings reading books together or separately. Ciri waded through Stammelfords Dialogues on the Nature of Magic Giambattistas Forces of the Elements and Richert and Moncks Natural Magic. She also flicked through – because she did not manage to read them in their entirety – such works as Jan Bekkers The Invisible World and Agnes of Glanvilles The Secret of Secrets. She dipped into the ancient yellowed Codex of Mirthe Ard Aercane and even the famous terrible Dhu Dwimmermorc full of menacing etchings.
She also reached for other books which had nothing to do with magic. She read The History of the World and A Treatise on Life. Nor did she leave out lighter works from the Temple library. Blushing she devoured Marquis La Creahmes Gambols and Anna Tillers The Kings Ladies. She read The Adversities of Loving and Time of the Moon collections of poems by the famous troubadour Dandilion. She shed tears over the ballads of Essi Daven subtle infused with mystery and collected in a small beautifully bound volume entitled The Blue Pearl.
She made frequent use of her privilege to ask questions. And she received answers. More and more frequently however she was the one being questioned. In the beginning it had seemed that Yennefer was not at all interested in her lot in her childhood in Cintra or the later events of war. But in time her questions became more and more concrete. Ciri had to reply and did so very unwillingly because every question the magician asked opened a door in her memory which she had promised herself never to open which she wanted to keep forever locked. Ever since she had met Geralt in Sodden she had believed she had begun another life that the other life – the one in Cintra – had been irrevocably wiped out. The witchers in Kaer Morhen never asked her about anything and before coming to the temple Geralt had even prevailed upon her not to say a word to anyone about who she was. Nenneke who of course knew about everything saw to it that to the other priestesses and the novices Ciri was exceptionally ordinary an illegitimate daughter of a knight and a peasant woman a child for whom there had been no place either in her fathers castle or her mothers cottage. Half of the novices in Meliteles Temple were just such children.
And Yennefer too knew the secret. She was the one who could be trusted. Yennefer asked. About it. About Cintra.
How did you get out of the town Ciri? How did you slip past the Nilfgaardians?
Ciri did not remember. Everything broke off was lost in obscurity and smoke. She remembered the siege saying goodbye to Queen Calanthe her grandmother; she remembered the barons and knights forcibly dragging her away from the bed where the wounded dying Lioness of Cintra lay. She remembered the frantic escape through flaming streets bloody battle and the horse falling. She remembered the black rider in a helmet adorned with the wings of a bird of prey.
And nothing more.
I dont remember. I really dont remember Lady Yennefer.
Yennefer did not insist. She asked different questions. She did so gently and tactfully and Ciri grew more and more at ease. Finally she started to speak herself. Without waiting to be asked she recounted her years as a child in Cintra and on the Isles of Skellige. About how she learned about the Law of Surprise and that fate had decreed her to be the destiny of Geralt of Rivia the white-haired witcher. She recalled the war her exile in the forests of Transriver her time among the druids of Angren and the time spent in the country. How Geralt had found her there and taken her to Kaer Morhen the Witchers Keep thus opening a new chapter in her short life.
One evening of her own initiative unasked casually joyfully and embellishing a great deal she told the enchantress about her first meeting with the witcher in Brokilon Forest amongst the dryads who had abducted her and wanted to force her to stay and become one of them.
Oh! said Yennefer on listening to the story Id give a lot to see that – Geralt I mean. Im trying to imagine the expression on his face in Brokilon when he saw what sort of Surprise destiny had concocted for him! Because he must have had a wonderful expression when he found out who you were?
Ciri giggled and her emerald eyes lit up devilishly.
Oh yes! she snorted. What an expression! Do you want to see? Ill show you. Look at me!
Yennefer burst out laughing.
That laughter thought Ciri watching swarms of black birds flying eastwards that laughter shared and sincere really brought us together her and me. We understood – both she and I – that we can laugh and talk together about him. About Geralt. Suddenly we became close although I knew perfectly well that Geralt both brought us together and separated us and that thats how it would always be.
Our laughter together brought us closer to each other.
As did the events two days later. In the forest on the hills. She was showing me how to find…
I dont understand why I have to look for these… Ive forgotten what theyre called again…
Intersections prompted Yennefer picking off the burrs which had attached themselves to her sleeve as they crossed the scrubs. I am showing you how to find them because theyre places from which you can draw the force.
But I know how to draw the force already! And you taught me yourself that the force is everywhere. So why are we roaming around in the bushes? After all theres a great deal of force in the Temple!
Yes indeed there is a fair amount there. Thats exactly why the Temple was built there and not somewhere else. And thats why on Temple grounds drawing it seems so easy to you.
My legs hurt! Can we sit down for a while?
All right my ugly one.
Lady Yennefer?
Yes?
Why do we always draw the force from water veins? Magical energy after all is everywhere. Its in the earth isnt it? In air in fire?
True.
And earth… Here theres plenty of earth around here. Under our feet. And air is everywhere! And should we want fire its enough to light a bonfire and…
You are still too weak to draw energy from the earth. You still dont know enough to succeed in drawing anything from air. And as for fire I absolutely forbid you to play with it. Ive already told you under no circumstances are you allowed to touch the energy of fire!
Dont shout. I remember.
They sat in silence on a fallen dry tree trunk listening to the wind rustling in the tree tops listening to a woodpecker hammering away somewhere close by. Ciri was hungry and her saliva was thick from thirst but she knew that complaining would not get her anywhere. In the past a month ago Yennefer had reacted to such complaints with a dry lecture on how to control such primitive instincts; later she had ignored them in contemptuous silence. Protesting was just as useless and produced as few results as sulking over being called ugly one.
The magician plucked the last burr from her sleeve. Shes going to ask me something in a moment thought Ciri I can hear her thinking about it. Shes going to ask about something I dont remember again. Or something I dont want to remember. No its senseless. Im not going to answer. All of that is in the past and theres no returning to the past. She once said so herself.
Tell me about your parents Ciri.
I cant remember them Lady Yennefer.
Please try to.
I really dont remember my papa… she said in a quiet voice succumbing to the command. Except… Practically nothing. My mama… My mama I do. She had long hair like this… And she was always sad… I remember… No I dont remember anything…
Try to remember please.
I cant!
Look at my star.
Seagulls screamed diving down between the fishing boats where they caught scourings and tiny fish emptied from the crates. The wind gently fluttered the lowered sails of the drakkars and smoke quelled by drizzle floated above the landing-stage. Triremes from Cintra were sailing into the port golden lions glistening on blue flags. Uncle Crach who was standing next to her with his hand – as large as the paw of a grizzly bear – on her shoulder suddenly fell to one knee. Warriors standing in rows rhythmically struck their shields with their swords.
Along the gang-plank towards them came Queen Calanthe. Her grandmother. She who was officially called Ard Rhena the Highest Queen on the Isles of Skellige. But Uncle Crach an Craite the Earl of Skellige still kneeling with bowed head greeted the Lioness of Cintra with a title which was less official but considered by the islanders to be more venerable.
Hail Modron.
Princess said Calanthe in a cold and authoritative voice without so much as a glance at the earl come here. Come here to me Ciri.
Her grandmothers hand was as strong and hard as a mans her rings cold as ice.
Where is Eist?
The King… stammered Crach. Is at sea Modron. He is looking for the remains… And the bodies. Since yesterday…
Why did he let them? shouted the queen. How could he allow it? How could you allow it Crach? Youre the Earl of Skellige! No drakkar is allowed to go out to sea without your permission! Why did you allow it Crach?
Uncle Crach bowed his head even lower.
Horses! said Calanthe. Were going to the fort. And tomorrow at dawn I am setting sail. I am taking the princess to Cintra. I will never allow her to return here. And you… You have a huge debt to repay me Crach. One day I will demand repayment.
I know Modron.
If I do not claim it she will do so. Calanthe looked at Ciri. You will repay the debt to her Earl. You know how.
Crach an Craite got to his feet straightened himself and the features of his weatherbeaten face hardened. With a swift move he drew from its sheath a simple steel sword devoid of ornaments and pulled up the sleeve on his left arm marked with thickened white scars.
Without the dramatic gestures snorted the queen. Save your blood. I said: one day. Remember!
Aen me Gláeddyv zvaere aBloedgeas Ard Rhena Lionors aep Xintra! Crach an Craite the Earl of the Isles of Skellige raised his arms and shook his sword. The warriors roared hoarsely and beat their weapons against their shields.
I accept your oath. Lead the way to the fort Earl.
Ciri remembered King Eists return his stony pale face. And the queens silence. She remembered the gloomy horrible feast at which the wild bearded sea wolves of Skellige slowly got drunk in terrifying silence. She remembered the whispers. Geas Muire… Geas Muire!
She remembered the trickles of dark beer poured onto the floor the horns smashed against the stone walls of the hall in bursts of desperate helpless senseless anger. Geas Muire! Pavetta!
Pavetta the Princess of Cintra and her husband Prince Duny. Ciris parents. Perished. Killed. Geas Muire the Curse of the Sea had killed them. They had been swallowed up by a tempest which no one had foreseen. A tempest which should not have broken out…
Ciri turned her head away so that Yennefer would not see the tears swelling in her eyes. Why all this she thought. Why these questions these recollections? Theres no returning to the past. Theres no one there for me any more. Not my papa nor my mama nor my grandmother the one who was Ard Rhena the Lioness of Cintra. Uncle Crach an Craite no doubt is also dead. I havent got anybody any more and am someone else. Theres no returning…
The magician remained silent lost in thought.
Is that when your dreams began? she asked suddenly.
No Ciri reflected. No not then. Not until later.
When?
The girl wrinkled her nose.
In the summer… The one before… Because the following summer there was the war already…
Aha. That means the dreams started after you met Geralt in Brokilon?
She nodded. Im not going to answer the next question she decided. But Yennefer did not ask anything. She quickly got to her feet and looked at the sun.
Well thats enough of this sitting around my ugly one. Its getting late. Lets carry on looking. Keep your hand held loosely in front of you and dont tense your fingers. Forward.
Where am I to go? Which direction?
Its all the same.
The veins are everywhere?
Almost. Youre going to learn how to discover them to find them in the open and recognise such spots. They are marked by trees which have dried up gnarled plants places avoided by all animals. Except cats.
Cats?
Cats like sleeping and resting on intersections. There are many stories about magical animals but really apart from the dragon the cat is the only creature which can absorb the force. No one knows why a cat absorbs it and what it does with it… Whats the matter?
Oooo… There in that direction! I think theres something there! Behind that tree!
Ciri dont fantasise. Intersections can only be sensed by standing over them… Hmmm… Interesting. Extraordinary Id say. Do you really feel the pull?
Really!
Lets go then. Interesting interesting… Well locate it. Show me where.
Here! On this spot!
Well done. Excellent. So you feel delicate cramps in your ring finger? See how it bends downwards? Remember thats the sign.
May I draw on it?
Wait Ill check.
Lady Yennefer? How does it work with this drawing of the force? If I gather force into myself then there might not be enough left down below. Is it right to do that? Mother Nenneke taught us that we mustnt take anything just like that for the fun of it. Even the cherry has to be left on its tree for the birds so that it can simply fall.
Yennefer put her arm around Ciri kissed her gently on the hair at her temple.
I wish she muttered others could hear what you said. Vilgefortz Francesca Terranova… Those who believe they have exclusive right to the force and can use it unreservedly. I wish they could listen to the little wise ugly one from Meliteles Temple. Dont worry Ciri. Its a good thing youre thinking about it but believe me there is enough force. It wont run out. Its as if you picked one single little cherry from a huge orchard.
Can I draw on it now?
Wait. Oh its a devilishly strong pocket. Its pulsating violently. Be careful ugly one. Draw on it carefully and very very slowly.
Im not frightened! Pah-pah! Im a witcher. Ha! I feel it! I feel… Ooouuuch! Lady… Ye… nnnne… feeeeer…
Damn it! I warned you! I told you! Head up! Up I say! Take this and put it to your nose or youll be covered in blood! Calmly calmly little one just dont faint. Im beside you. Im beside you… daughter. Hold the handkerchief. Ill just conjure up some ice…
There was a great fuss about that small amount of blood. Yennefer and Nenneke did not talk to each other for a week.
For a week Ciri lazed around read books and got bored because the magician had put her studies on hold. The girl did not see her for entire days – Yennefer disappeared somewhere at dawn returned in the evening looked at her strangely and was oddly taciturn.
After a week Ciri had had enough. In the evening when the enchantress returned she went up to her without a word and hugged her hard.
Yennefer was silent. For a very long time. She did not have to speak. Her fingers clasping the girls shoulders tightly spoke for her.
The following day the high priestess and the lady magician made up having talked for several hours.
And then to Ciris great joy everything returned to normal.
Look into my eyes Ciri. A tiny light. The formula please!
Aine verseos!
Good. Look at my hand. The same move and disperse the light in the air.
Aine aen aenye!
Excellent. And what gesture comes next? Yes thats the one. Very good. Strengthen the gesture and draw. More more dont stop!
Oooouuuch…
Keep your back straight! Arms by your side! Hands loose no unnecessary moves with your fingers. Every move can multiply the effect. Do you want a fire to burst out here? Strengthen it what are you waiting for?
Oouuch no… I cant—
Relax and stop shaking! Draw! What are you doing? There thats better… Dont weaken your will! Thats too fast youre hyperventilating! Unnecessarily getting hot! Slower ugly one calmer. I know its unpleasant. Youll get used to it.
It hurts… My belly… Down here—
Youre a woman its a typical reaction. Over time youll harden yourself against it. But in order to harden yourself you have to practise without any painkillers blocking you. It really is necessary Ciri. Dont be afraid of anything Im alert and screening you. Nothing can happen to you. But you have to endure the pain. Breathe calmly. Concentrate. The gesture please. Perfect. And take the force draw it pull it in… Good good… Just a bit more…
O… O… Oooouuuch!
There you see? You can do it if you want to. Now watch my hand. Carefully. Perform the same movement. Fingers! Fingers Ciri! Look at my hand not the ceiling! Now thats good yes very good. Tie it up. And now turn it around reverse the move and now issue the force in the form of a stronger light.
Eeeee… Eeeeek… Aiiiieee…
Stop moaning! Control yourself! Its just cramp! Itll stop in a moment! Fingers wider extinguish it give it back give it back from yourself! Slower damn it or your blood vessels will burst again!
Eeeeeek!
Too abrupt ugly one still too abrupt. I know the force is bursting out but you have to learn to control it. You mustnt allow outbursts like the one a moment ago. If I hadnt insulated you you would have caused havoc here. Now once more. Were starting right from the beginning. Move and formula.
No! Not again! I cant!
Breathe slowly and stop shaking. Its plain hysteria this time you dont fool me. Control yourself concentrate and begin.
No please Lady Yennefer… It hurts… I feel sick…
Just no tears Ciri. Theres no sight more nauseating than a magician crying. Nothing arouses greater pity. Remember that. Never forget that. One more time from the beginning. Spell and gesture. No no this time without copying me. Youre going to do it by yourself. So use your memory!
Aine verseos… Aine aen aenye… Oooouuuuch!
No! Too fast!
Magic like a spiked iron arrow lodged in her. Wounded her deeply. Hurt. Hurt with the strange sort of pain oddly associated with bliss.
To relax they once again ran around the park. Yennefer persuaded Nenneke to take Ciris sword out of storage and so enabled the girl to practise her steps dodges and attacks – in secret of course to prevent the other priestesses and novices seeing her. But magic was omnipresent. Ciri learned how – using simple spells and focusing her will – to relax her muscles combat cramps control adrenalin how to master her aural labyrinth and its nerve how to slow or speed her pulse and how to cope without oxygen for short periods.
The lady magician knew a surprising amount about a witchers sword and dance. She knew a great deal about the secrets of Kaer Morhen; there was no doubt she had visited the Keep. She knew Vesemir and Eskel. Although not Lambert and Coën.
Yennefer used to visit Kaer Morhen. Ciri guessed why – when they spoke of the Keep – the eyes of the enchantress grew warm lost their angry gleam and their cold indifferent wise depth. If the words had befitted Yennefers person Ciri would have called her dreamy lost in memories.
Ciri could guess the reason.
There was a subject which the girl instinctively and carefully avoided. But one day she got carried away and spoke out. About Triss Merigold. Yennefer as if casually as if indifferently asking as if banal sparing questions dragged the rest from her. Her eyes were hard and impenetrable.
Ciri could guess the reason. And amazingly she no longer felt annoyed.
Magic was calming.
The so-called Sign of Aard Ciri is a very simple spell belonging to the family of psychokinetic magic which is based on thrusting energy in the required direction. The force of the thrust depends on how the will of the person throwing it is focused and on the expelled force. It can be considerable. The witchers adapted the spell making use of the fact that it does not require knowledge of a magical formula – concentration and the gesture are enough. Thats why they called it a Sign. Where they got the name from I dont know maybe from the Elder Speech – the word ard as you know means mountain upper or the highest. If that is truly the case then the name is very misleading because its hard to find an easier psychokinetic spell. We obviously arent going to waste time and energy on something as primitive as the witchers Sign. We are going to practise real psychokinesis. Well practise on… Ah on that basket lying under the apple tree. Concentrate.
Ready.
You focus yourself quickly. Let me remind you: control the flow of the force. You can only emit as much as you draw. If you release even a tiny bit more you do so at the cost of your constitution. An effort like that could render you unconscious and in extreme circumstances could even kill you. If on the other hand you release everything you draw you forfeit all possibility of repeating it and you will have to draw it again and as you know its not easy to do and it is painful.
Ooooh I know!
You mustnt slacken your concentration and allow the energy to tear itself away from you of its own accord. My Mistress used to say that emitting the force must be like blowing a raspberry in a ballroom; do it gently sparingly and with control. And in such a way that you dont let those around you to know it was you. Understood?
Understood!
Straighten yourself up. Stop giggling. Let me remind you that spells are a serious matter. They are cast with grace and pride. The motions are executed fluently but with restraint. With dignity. You do not pull faces grimace or stick your tongue out. You are handling a force of nature show Nature some respect.
All right Lady Yennefer.
Careful this time Im not screening you. You are an independent spell-caster. This is your debut ugly one. You saw that demi-john of wine in the chest of drawers? If your debut is successful your mistress will drink it tonight.
By herself?
Novices are only allowed to drink wine once they are qualified apprentices. You have to wait. Youre smart so that just means another ten years or so not more. Right lets start. Arrange your fingers. And the left hand? Dont wave it around! Let it hang loose or rest it on your hip. Fingers! Good. Right release.
Aaaah…
I didnt ask you to make funny noises. Emit the energy. In silence.
Haa ha! It jumped! The basket jumped! Did you see?
It barely twitched. Ciri sparingly does not mean weakly. Psychokinesis is used with a specific goal in mind. Even witchers use the Sign of Aard to throw their opponent off his feet. The energy you emitted would not knock their hat off their head! Once more a little stronger. Go for it!
Ha! It certainly flew! It was all right that time wasnt it Lady Yennefer?
Hmmm… Youll run to the kitchen afterwards and pinch a bit of cheese to go with our wine… That was almost right. Almost. Stronger still ugly one dont be frightened. Lift the basket from the ground and throw it hard against the wall of that shack make feathers fly. Dont slouch! Head up! Gracefully but with pride! Be bold be bold! Oh bloody hell!
Oh dear… Im sorry Lady Yennefer… I probably… probably used a bit too much…
A little bit. Dont worry. Come here. Come on little one.
And… and the shack?
These things happen. Theres no need to take it to heart. Your debut on the whole should be viewed as a success. And the shack? It wasnt too pretty. I dont think anyone will miss its presence in the landscape. Hold on ladies! Calm down calm down why this uproar and commotion nothing has happened! Easy Nenneke! Really nothing has happened. The planks just need to be cleared away. Theyll make good firewood!
During the warm still afternoons the air grew thick with the scent of flowers and grass; pulsating with peace and silence broken by the buzz of bees and enormous beetles. On afternoons like this Yennefer carried Nennekes wicker chair out into the garden and sat in it stretching her legs out in front of her. Sometimes she studied books sometimes read letters which she received by means of strange couriers usually birds. At times she simply sat gazing into the distance. With one hand and lost in thought she ruffled her black shiny locks with the other she stroked Ciris head as she sat on the grass snuggled up to the magicians warm firm thigh.
Lady Yennefer?
Im here ugly one.
Tell me can one do anything with magic?
No.
But you can do a great deal am I right?
You are. The enchantress closed her eyes for a moment and touched her eyelids with her fingers. A great deal.
Something really great… Something terrible! Very terrible?
Sometimes even more so than one would have liked.
Hmm… And could I… When will I be able to do something like that?
I dont know. Maybe never. Would that you dont have to.
Silence. No words. Heat. The scent of flowers and herbs.
Lady Yennefer?
What now ugly one?
How old were you when you became a wizard?
When I passed the preliminary exams? Thirteen.
Ha! Just like I am now! And how… How old were you when… No I wont ask about that—
Sixteen.
Aha… Ciri blushed faintly and pretended to be suddenly interested in a strangely formed cloud hovering over the temple towers. And how old were you… when you met Geralt?
Older ugly one. A bit older.
You still keep on calling me ugly one! You know how I dont like it. Why do you do it?
Because Im malicious. Wizards are always malicious.
But I dont want to… dont want to be ugly. I want to be pretty. Really pretty like you Lady Yennefer. Can I through magic be as pretty as you one day?
You… Fortunately you dont have to… You dont need magic for it. You dont know how lucky you are.
But I want to be really pretty!
You are really pretty. A really pretty ugly one. My pretty little ugly one…
Oh Lady Yennefer!
Ciri youre going to bruise my thigh.
Lady Yennefer?
Yes.
What are you looking at like that?
At that tree. That linden tree.
And whats so interesting about it?
Nothing. Im simply feasting my eyes on it. Im happy that… I can see it.
I dont understand.
Good.
Silence. No words. Humid.
Lady Yennefer!
What now?
Theres a spider crawling towards your leg! Look how hide-ous it is!
A spiders a spider.
Kill it!
I cant be bothered to bend over.
Then kill it with magic!
On the grounds of Meliteles Temple? So that Nenneke can throw us out head first? No thank you. And now be quiet. I want to think.
And what are you thinking about so seriously? Hmm. All right Im not going to say anything now.
Im beside myself with joy. I was worried you were going to ask me another one of your unequal grand questions.
Why not? I like your unequal grand answers!
Youre getting impudent ugly one.
Im a wizard. Wizards are malicious and impudent.
No words. Silence. Stillness in the air. Close humidity as if before a storm. And silence this time broken by the distant croaking of ravens and crows.
There are more and more of them. Ciri looked upwards. Theyre flying and flying… Like in autumn… hide-ous birds… The priestesses say that its a bad sign… An omen or something. What is an omen Lady Yennefer?
Look it up in Dhu Dwimmermorc. Theres a whole chapter on the subject.
Silence.
Lady Yennefer…
Oh hell. What is it now?
Its been so long why isnt Geralt… Why isnt he coming?
Hes forgotten about you no doubt ugly one. Hes found himself a prettier girl.
Oh no! I know he hasnt forgotten! He couldnt have! I know that I know that for certain Lady Yennefer!
Its good you know. Youre a lucky ugly one.
I didnt like you she repeated.
Yennefer did not look at her as she stood at the window with her back turned staring at the hills looming black in the east. Above the hills the sky was dark with flocks of ravens and crows.
In a minute shes going to ask why I didnt like her thought Ciri. No shes too clever to ask such a question. Shell dryly draw my attention to my grammar and ask when I started using the past tense. And Ill tell her. Ill be just as dry as she is Ill parody her tone of voice let her know that I too can pretend to be cold unfeeling and indifferent ashamed of my feelings and emotions. Ill tell her everything. I want to I have to tell her everything. I want her to know everything before we leave Meliteles Temple. Before we part to finally meet the one I miss. The one she misses. The one who no doubt misses us both. I want to tell her that…
Ill tell her. Its enough for her to ask.
The magician turned from the window and smiled. She did not ask anything.
They left the following day early in the morning. Both wore mens travelling clothes cloaks hats and hoods which hid their hair. Both were armed.
Only Nenneke saw them off. She spoke quietly and at length with Yennefer then they both – the magician and the priestess – shook each others hand hard like men. Ciri holding the reins of her dapple-grey mare wanted to say goodbye in the same way but Nenneke did not allow it. She embraced her hugged her and gave her a kiss. There were tears in her eyes. In Ciris too.
Well said the priestess finally wiping her eye with the sleeve of her robe now go. May the Great Melitele protect you on your way my dears. But the goddess has a great many things on her mind so look after yourselves too. Take care of her Yennefer. Keep her safe like the apple of your eye.
I hope – the magician smiled faintly – that Ill manage to keep her safer.
Across the sky towards Pontar Valley flew flocks of crows croaking loudly. Nenneke did not look at them.
Take care she repeated. Bad times are approaching. It might turn out to be true what Ithlinne aep Aevenien knew what she predicted. The Time of the Sword and Axe is approaching. The Time of Contempt and the Wolfs Blizzard. Take care of her Yennefer. Dont let anyone harm her.
Ill be back Mother said Ciri leaping into her saddle. Ill be back for sure! Soon!

The mare flattened her ears against her skull and snorted throwing up earth with her hooves; she didnt want to go. Geralt didnt calm her with the Sign; he jumped from the saddle and threw the reins over the horses head. He no longer had his old sword in its lizard-skin sheath on his back; its place was filled with a shining beautiful weapon with a cruciform and slender well-weighted hilt ending in a spherical pommel made of white metal.
This time the gate didnt open for him. It was already open just as he had left it.
He heard singing. He didnt understand the words; he couldnt even identify the language. He didnt need to—the witcher felt and understood the very nature the essence of this quiet piercing song which flowed through the veins in a wave of nauseous overpowering menace.
The singing broke off abruptly and then he saw her.
She was clinging to the back of the dolphin in the dried-up fountain embracing the moss-overgrown stone with her tiny hands so pale they seemed transparent. Beneath her storm of tangled black hair shone huge wide-open eyes the color of anthracite.
Geralt slowly drew closer his step soft and springy tracing a semi-circle from the wall and blue rosebush. The creature glued to the dolphins back followed him with her eyes turning her petite face with an expression of longing and full of charm. He could still hear her song even though her thin pale lips were held tight and not the slightest sound emerged from them.
The witcher halted at a distance of ten paces. His sword slowly drawn from its black enameled sheath glistened and glowed above his head.
Its silver he said. This blade is silver.
The pale little face did not flinch; the anthracite eyes did not change expression.
Youre so like a rusalka the witcher continued calmly that you could deceive anyone. All the more as youre a rare bird black-haired one. But horses are never mistaken. They recognize creatures like you instinctively and perfectly. What are you? I think youre a moola or an alpor. An ordinary vampire couldnt come out in the sun.
The corners of the pale lips quivered and turned up a little.
Nivellen attracted you with that shape of his didnt he? You evoked his dreams. I can guess what sort of dreams they were and I pity him.
The creature didnt move.
You like birds continued the witcher. But that doesnt stop you biting the necks of people of both sexes does it? You and Nivellen indeed! A beautiful couple youd make a monster and a vampire rulers of a forest castle. Youd dominate the whole area in a flash. You eternally thirsty for blood and he your guardian a murderer at your service a blind tool. But first he had to become a true monster not a human being in a monsters mask.
The huge black eyes narrowed.
Where is he black-haired one? You were singing so youve drunk some blood. Youve taken the ultimate measure which means you havent managed to enslave his mind. Am I right?
The black-tressed head nodded slightly almost imperceptibly and the corners of the mouth turned up even more. The tiny little face took on an eerie expression.
No doubt you consider yourself the lady of this manor now?
A nod this time clearer.
Are you a moola?
A slow shake of the head. The hiss which reverberated through his bones could only have come from the pale ghastly smiling lips although the witcher didnt see them move.
Alpor?
Denial.
The witcher backed away and clasped the hilt of his sword tighter. That means youre—
The corners of the lips started to turn up higher and higher; the lips flew open…
A bruxa! the witcher shouted throwing himself toward the fountain.
From behind the pale lips glistened white spiky fangs. The vampire jumped up arched her back like a leopard and screamed.
The wave of sound hit the witcher like a battering ram depriving him of breath crushing his ribs piercing his ears and brain with thorns of pain. Flying backward he just managed to cross his wrists in the Sign of Heliotrop. The spell cushioned some of his impact with the wall but even so the world grew dark and the remainder of his breath burst from his lungs in a groan.
On the dolphins back in the stone circle of the dried-up fountain where a dainty girl in a white dress had sat just a moment ago an enormous black bat flattened its glossy body opening its long narrow jaws wide revealing rows of needle-like white teeth. The membranous wings spread and flapped silently and the creature charged at the witcher like an arrow fired from a crossbow.
Geralt with the metallic taste of blood in his mouth shouted a spell and threw his hand fingers spread in the Sign of Quen out in front of him. The bat hissing turned abruptly then chuckled and veered up into the air before diving down vertically straight at the nape of the witchers neck. Geralt jumped aside slashed and missed. The bat smoothly gracefully drew in a wing circled around him and attacked anew opening its eyeless toothed snout wide. Geralt waited sword held with both hands always pointed in the creatures direction. At the last moment he jumped—not to the side but forward dealing a swinging cut which made the air howl.
He missed. It was so unexpected that he lost his rhythm and dodged a fraction of a second too late. He felt the beasts talons tear his cheek and a damp velvety wing slapped against his neck. He curled up on the spot transferred the weight of his body to his right leg and slashed backward sharply missing the amazingly agile creature again.
The bat beat its wings soared up and glided toward the fountain. As the crooked claws scraped against the stone casing the monstrous slobbering snout was already blurring morphing disappearing although the pale little lips which were taking its place couldnt quite hide the murderous fangs.
The bruxa howled piercingly modulating her voice into a macabre tune glared at the witcher with eyes full of hatred and screamed again.
The sound wave was so powerful it broke through the Sign. Black and red circles spun in Geralts eyes; his temples and the crown of his head throbbed. Through the pain drilling in his ears he began to hear voices wailing and moaning the sound of flute and oboe the rustle of a gale. The skin on his face grew numb and cold. He fell to one knee and shook his head.
The black bat floated toward him silently opening its toothy jaws. Geralt still stunned by the scream reacted instinctively. He jumped up and in a flash matching the tempo of his movements to the speed of the monsters flight took three steps forward dodged turned a semi-circle and then quick as a thought delivered a two-handed blow. The blade met with no resistance… almost no resistance. He heard a scream but this time it was a scream of pain caused by the touch of silver.
The wailing bruxa was morphing on the dolphins back. On her white dress slightly above her left breast a red stain was visible beneath a slash no longer than a little finger. The witcher ground his teeth—the cut which should have sundered the beast in two had been nothing but a scratch.
Shout vampire he growled wiping the blood from his cheek. Scream your guts out. Lose your strength. And then Ill slash your pretty little head off!
You. You will be the first to grow weak Sorcerer. I will kill you.
The bruxas lips didnt move but the witcher heard the words clearly; they resounded in his mind echoing and reverberating as if underwater.
We shall see he muttered through his teeth as he walked bent over in the direction of the fountain.
I will kill you. Ill kill you. Ill kill you.
We shall see.
The Swallows Tower
CHAPTER ONE
It was well known that the Universe as well as life revolves in a circle. On the rim of this circle in pairs exactly opposite each other are eight magic points which give a full rotation—the annual cycle. These points lying along the rim of the circle in pairs opposite each other are: Imbaelk that is Germination; Lammas that is Maturity; Belleteyn that is Blossoming; Saovine that is Withering. The rim of the circle is also marked by two solstices—winter or Midinvaerne and summer or Midaete. There are also two equinoxes—spring or Birke and autumn or Velen. These dates divide the circle into eight parts—and so the Elven calendar year is divided.
When Humans landed in the estuary of the Yaruga and the delta of the Pontar they brought with them their own lunar calendar dividing the year into twelve months—which cover the full annual cycle of work in the fields—from the beginning of January until the end—in which frost turns the earth into a hard lump. But although humans divided the year and counted the date differently they accepted the Elven circle and the eight points: Imbaelk Lammas Belleteyn Saovine and both solstices and equinoxes and among the humans they became important holidays. Distinguishing themselves among other dates as much as a solitary tree standing out in a meadow.
These dates differ from others by magic.
It was no secret that during these eight days and nights magical auras intensify dramatically. Nobody is surprised by these magical phenomena and enigmatic events that accompany these eight dates especially the equinoxes and solstices. Everyone had become accustomed to these phenomena and they seldom gave rise to great sensation.
This year was different.
This year as Humans usually celebrate the autumn equinox festival dinner during which the table had the largest possible number of fruits from the harvest that year but no more than a little of each of them. So custom commanded. Once they had prepared the dinner and had thanked the goddess Melitele for the years harvest the Humans settled down to rest. And then the horror began.
Shortly before midnight a terrible storm broke the wind blew hellishly in which could be heard the crackling of broken branches roof timbers creaking and shutters banging and the sound of ghostly howls screams and wailing. Even the clouds took on fantastic shapes among which the most frequently repeated were silhouettes of galloping horses and unicorns. The wind suddenly stopped after about an hour. But silence did not occur because the night suddenly came alive with the chirping and fluttering of hundreds of nightjars these mysterious birds according to popular belief flock to the houses of the dying and sing their mournful song. This night the chorus of the nightjars was so massive and loud that it seemed as if the whole world were to die.
The nightjars warbled there wild song for the dead while on the horizon the clouds had extinguished the remains of the moonlight. Then all of a sudden the dreadful howling of a Banshee was heard harbinger of sudden and violent death and through the sky rode the Wild Hunt a procession of ghosts with flaming eyes riding on the backs of skeletal horses their tattered clothes waving around them like banners. From time to time the Wild Hunt made its harvest but it had not been for decades so terrible. In Novigrad it was counted more than twenty people had disappeared without a trace.
When the Hunt and the clouds had dispersed Human eyes were once again able to see the moon as usual at the time of the equinox was waning. But this night it was the color of blood.
Ordinary people had many explanations for the equinoxial phenomena which differed significantly according to regional demonology. Astrologers druids and wizards also had their explanations but were mostly wrong and exaggerated. Few very few people were able to associate these phenomena with actual facts. For example on the Skellige Islands a few superstitious people saw in those events the prophecies of Tedd Deireadh the end of the world which is proceeded by the battle of Ragh nar Roog the final struggle between the forces of Light and Darkness. The superstitious believed that the violent storm on the night of the autumn equinox and the waves that shook the islands were driven by the monstrous bow of Naglfar from Morhogg leading an army of ghosts and demons in a ship built from the finger and toe-nails of the dead. Wiser and better-informed people however associated the fury of the elements with the infamous sorceress Yennefer and her terrible death. And still other even better-informed people saw a sign in the stormy sea that someone was dying in whose veins ran the blood of the Rulers of Skellige and Cintra.
Since the world began the night of the autumn equinox has also been a night of ghosts nightmares and apparitions sudden awakening in the night with breath and heartbeat caught in fear between sheets twisted and wet with perspiration. The apparitions and awakenings did not even spare the clearest of heads—in Nilfgaard in the Towers of Gold the emperor himself Emhyr var Emreis woke up screaming. Far to the north in Lan Exeter King Esterad Thyssen jumped out of bed waking his wife Queen Zuleyka. In Tretogor Dijkstra woke up and reached for his knife waking the wife of the Minister of Treasury. In the palace of Montecalvo Philippa Eilhart jumped up from damask bed linens without waking the wife of Count de Noailles. They awoke—more or less sharply—the dwarf Yarpen Zigrin in Mahakam the old witcher Vesemir in the mountain fortress of Kaer Morhen the trainee banker Fabio Sachs in the city of Gors Velen and Crach an Craite on board the ship Ringhorn. It awoke the witch Fringilla Vigo at the castle of Beauclair the priestess Sigrdrifa in the temple of the goddess Freya located on the island of Hindarsfjall. It awoke Daniel Etcheverry Earl of Garramone at the besieged fortress of Maribor Lance-corporal Zyvik of the Dun Banner at the fort of Ban Glean. Businessman Dominik Bombastus Houvenaghel in the town of Claremont and many others.
Few were able to connect these phenomena with actual events. And with a specific person. As luck would have it three of these people spent the night of the autumn equinox under one roof. In the temple of the Goddess Melitele in Ellander.
Nightjars… moaned the scribe Jarre while watching the darkness that flooded the park in the sanctuary. I think there are thousands of them a whole flock… They scream for the death of someone… For the death of her… She is dying…
Do not talk nonsense Triss Merigold turned abruptly raised her clenched fist and looked for a moment like she was going to push the boy or hit him in the chest. Do you believe in stupid superstitions? September is finished the birds are gathering to migrate. It is totally natural!
She is dying…
Nobody is dying! cried the enchantress pale with rage. Nobody do you understand? Stop babbling!
In the library hall novices were awakened by the natural alarm. Their faces were grave and pale.
Jarre Triss calmed down she put her hand on the boys shoulder and squeezed. Youre the only man in the temple. All are looking to you looking to you for help. You must not be afraid do not panic. Control yourself. Do not disappoint us.
Jarre sighed and with a visible effort tried to suppress the shaking of his hands and lips.
Im not afraid… he whispered avoiding the eyes of the enchantress. It is not fear just concern. For her. I saw her in a dream…
I saw her too Triss pursed her lips we had the same dream—you me and Nenneke. But not a word about it.
The blood on her face… So much blood…
I have asked you to be quiet. Nenneke is coming.
The high priestess approached them. Her face was tired. At Triss silent question she shook her head. Noticing Jarre opening his mouth she hastened to speak.
Unfortunately nothing. When the Wild Hunt passed over the sanctuary it awakened almost everyone but none have had visions. Even as vague as ours. Go to sleep boy there is nothing here for you to do. Girls go back to the dormitory!
She rubbed her face with both hands.
Heh… Equinox! Cursed night… Go to sleep Triss. We cannot do anything.
This helplessness drives me crazy the enchantress said clenching her fists. Just thinking that she is suffering bleeding that she is threatened… The devil if I know what to do!
Nenneke the high priestess of the temple of Melitele turned.
And you have tried to pray?
In the south far beyond the mountains of Amell in Ebbing in the country called Pereplut in the extensive swamps formed by the intersection of the rivers Velda Lete and Arete a place about eight hundred miles as the crow flies from the city of Ellander and the temple of Melitele at dawn a nightmare abruptly woke an old hermit named Vysogota. Once awake Vysogota could not remember any of the content of the dream but a strange uneasiness kept him from falling back to sleep.
Cold cold cold brrr Vysogota said to himself as he walked along a path through the bushes. Cold cold cold brrr.
The next trap was empty. Not a muskrat. A whole day of hunting with no luck. Vysogota cleaned the mud and the algae covering the trap muttering curses and sniffing his nose.
Huh it is winter he said walking towards the swamp. And it is not even the end of September. After all we are barely four days after the equinox. Such cold at this time I cannot remember in my whole life. And I have been alive a long time!
The next trap the last one was also empty. Vysogota had no desire to even curse.
There is no doubt mused the old man that year after year the climate is slowly cooling. And now it seems the cooling effect is accelerating like an avalanche. Ha the Elves had foreseen this a long time ago but who believes in the predictions of the Elves?
Above the old mans head fluttered wings and dark silhouettes began to dart. The fog over the marshes rang with the sudden wild shriek of nightjars and with the rapid flapping of their wings. Vysogota paid no attention to the birds. He was not superstitious and there had always been many nightjars in the swamp especially at dawn when they flew so close it was a wonder they didnt collide with his head. Well they may not have as many as they have this day and not always with this dismal screaming… However in recent times it was the nature for outrageous antics and strange phenomena to follow one another each more bizarre than the last.
He was pulling the last snare from the water also empty when he heard the neighing of a horse. The nightjars singing stopped as if on command.
Even on the moor Pereplut had dry thickets located in higher places ridges covered with black birch alders cornejo dogwood and blackthorn. Most of the groves were surrounded by bogs so that it was completely impossible for any horse or rider who did not know the way to reach them. And yet the neighing—Vysogota heard again—came precisely from one of these groves.
Curiosity overcame caution.
Vysogota did not know much about horses and their breeds but he was an aesthetician and knew how to recognize and appreciate beauty. And the horses hair glistening like anthracite silhouetted against the trunks of birches was extraordinarily beautiful. It was the quintessence of true beauty. It was so beautiful it seemed unreal.
But it was real. And it was real in the way it was trapped entangled with the halter straps and red blood embrace of the branches of a cornejo.
When Vysogota came closer the horse pricked up its ears gracefully shook its head turned and stamped until the earth trembled. Now he could see that the animal was a trapped mare. The old man saw something else. Something that caused his heart to run away beating and invisible fingers to squeeze his throat.
Behind the horse in a shallow ditch lay a corpse.
Vysogota threw his bag on the floor. He was ashamed that his first thought had been to turn around and run away. He approached with caution because the black mare stamped the floor and chewed her bit and was apparently only awaiting an opportunity to bite or kick a stranger.
The corpse was a dead teenage boy. He lay facedown on the ground one arm crushed against the side of his body the other outstretched to the side with fingers dug into the ground. The boy was wearing a suede jacket tight leather pants and elven boots with buckles that reached to the knees.
Vysogota bent down and at that moment the corpse groaned loudly. The gray mare whinnied sharply and stomped the earth with her hooves.
The hermit knelt down and carefully turned the wounded boy over. Instinctively he drew back his head and hissed at the sight of the monstrous mask of dirt and dried blood on the boys face. Gently he wiped away the moss leaves and sand on his lips—covered with snot and drool—and tried to remove a tangle of hair stuck to his cheek with blood. The wounded boy groaned dully tensed and then began to tremble. Vysogota removed the hair from his face.
A girl he said loudly unable to believe what was right in front of him. It is a girl.
If the day after at nightfall someone had crept up to the hut deep in the swamp and looked through the cracks in the shutters in the flickering light of an oil lamp they would have seen a slender body with its head wrapped in bandages lying motionless almost dead covered with a fur blanket. They would have also seen an old man sitting with a long white beard and white hair falling from the edges of his bald head down to his shoulders. They would have seen the old man silhouetted against a lit candle how on the table there was an hourglass how he sharpened his pen as he leaned over a sheet of parchment. How he intently watched the wounded girl and spoke to himself.
But nothing like that could happen nobody could see. The hut with a roof covered with moss was lost in the mists abandoned in the middle of the marshes where no one dared to tread.
I record the following Vysogota dipped his pen into the ink. It is past the third hour after the operation. Diagnosis—vulnus incisivum a laceration inflicted with considerable force by an unknown object probably a curved blade. The wound begins under the eye socket on the left cheek and runs through the temporal region towards the ear. The deepest part of the wound which reaches the periosteum starts under the eye socket. The estimated time that has passed since the wounds were inflicted until the time of the first treatment ten hours.
The pen squeaked on the parchment but the squeaking did not last for more than a few moments. For only a few lines. Vysogota obviously did not consider everything he was saying to himself as worthy of being written down.
Returning to the treatment of the wounds the old man continued fixing his eyes on the pulsating and crackling flame of the tallow candle I write the following: I did not cut along the edges of the injury I limited myself to only removing a few tears that were not bleeding and clotting of course. I cleaned the wound with an extract of willow bark. I removed the dirt and foreign bodies. Then stitched it with hemp thread. Other types of string are not available to me. Finally I put on a poultice of mountain arnica and gauze bandages.
A mouse scampered though the middle of the room. Vysogota threw it a piece of bread. The girl on the pallet breathed raggedly and moaned in her sleep.
It is eight hours after the procedure. The state of the patient—no change. The state of the doctor… in other words mine is improved since I repaired it with a bit of sleep… I can continue with the notes. It would therefore be appropriate to transcribe in these pages some information about my patient. For future generations. In case some future generations are able to get to these wetlands before this becomes rot and discarded ashes.
Vysogota sighed heavily dipped the pen and cleaned it on the edge of the fountain.
As for the patient he murmured let it be recorded as follows: She appeared to be about sixteen years of age tall her formation is rather thin but at least it is not weak showing no signs of malnutrition. Muscle and physique are rather typical of a young elf but I have not noticed any other characteristics of mixing… even quadroon inclusive. A lower percent of elven blood as is known can leave no trace.
Only then did Vysogota realize that he had not written on the page not one rune not a single word. He supported the pen on the paper but the ink had dried. The old man paid no attention.
Let it be recorded also he continued that she has never given birth. Also on the body there are no old signs left after accidents or injuries no scars or traces of those who are put to hard work or a risky life. I emphasize that I speak of old signs. There are no shortage of recent signs throughout the body. The girl has been beaten. A real beating. And not at the hands of her father. Probably kicked her too.
I also found on the body a rather strange sign… Humm this is written for the sake of science… In the groin near the pubic mound she had a tattoo of a red rose.
Vysogota contemplated the sharp tip of the pen after which he dipped it into the ink. This time however he did not forget the purpose for which he had done this—he began to cover the paper with regular lines of sloped writing. He continued writing until the pen dried up.
Half conscious he continued she shouted and talked. Her accent and manner of expression if we discount the constant expressions interspersed with the obscene slang of criminals caused considerable confusion and was difficult to locate but I venture to say that she came from the north instead of the south. Some of the words…
Again the pen squeaked. Briefly far less than was needed to write down everything he had said a moment ago. After which he continued his monologue exactly where he was interrupted.
Some words names and nicknames that she spoke in her fever would be better not to write. It is worth being investigated. All the indications are that a very very unusual person has made their way to the hut of old Vysogota…
He was silent for a while listening.
I hope he muttered that old Vysogotas hut does not become the end of her road.
Vysogota bent over the parchment and even leaned on the pen but he wrote nothing not a single rune. He threw the pen on the table. He gasped for a moment muttering angrily and then snorted. He looked at the bed and listened to the sound which came from there.
I have to admit he said in a tired voice that my fears are in place. All my efforts may be inadequate and ineffective. My patient is doing very poorly and has a high fever. The wound is infected. We have experienced three of the four cardinal symptoms of acute inflammation. Redness heat and a tumor are easy to notice at this time to the eye and touch. When the post-operative shock has passed there will no doubt be the fourth symptom – pain. Let it be written that it has been almost half a century since I devoted myself to the practice of medicine; I see how the years weigh on my memory and the agility of my fingers. I cannot do much there is even less I can do. I do not have enough remedies or medications. All my hope lies in the defense mechanisms of a young body…
Twelve hours after the procedure. As expected there has appeared the fourth main symptom of inflammation – pain. The patient screams with pain fever and her tremors have increased. I have nothing no drugs I can give her. I have a small amount of elixir of stamonium but she is too weak to survive its action. I also have some monkshood but it would kill her instantly.
Fifteen hours after the procedure. It is dawn. The patient is unconscious. The fever is still rising and the tremors are increasing. Beyond this there appears to be a sharp contraction of the muscles of the face. If it is tetanus the girl is lost. But let us hope it is only a facial nerve… or the trigeminal nerve… or both. She will be disfigured… but alive…
Vysogota looked at the parchment—he had not written a rune or a word.
Provided he said dully she survives the infection.
Twenty hours after the procedure. The fever is still rising. The patients status is critical. Redness heat tumor and pain it seems to me have not yet reached their peak. But she has no chance of even living to reach those boundaries. So I write… I Vysogota of Corvo do not believe in the existence of the gods. But if by chance there are please take into your protection this girl. And forgive me for what I did… if what I did turned out to be in error.
Vysogota dropped his pen rubbed his eyes which were swollen and itchy and rested his hands on his temples.
I have given her a mixture of monkshood and stramonium he said in a low voice. The next few hours will decide everything.
He was not asleep only dozing when he was awoken by a cry. More a cry of anger than pain. Outside the dawns dim light shone through cracks in the shutters. The sand in the hourglass had stopped falling long ago. Vysogota as usual forgot to turn it around. The wick of the candle was extinguished only the ruby glow of the fireplace poorly lit the corner of the room. The old man stood up and pushed aside the curtain separating the bed from the rest of the room to give some reassurance to the patient.
The patient was getting off the floor on which she had fallen a moment before and was sitting on the edge of the bed trying to scratch her face under the bandage. Vysogota coughed.
Ill ask you not to get up. You are weak. If you want something call me. Im always near.
Well I do not want you to be near she said softly but very clearly. I want to piss.
When he returned to collect the chamber pot she lay on the bed on her back massaging the bandage covering her cheek and pressed to her forehead and neck with tape. When he returned after a while he found her in the same position.
Four days? she asked staring at the ceiling.
Five. It has been almost a day since we last spoke. Youve slept the entire day. That is good. You need to sleep.
I feel better.
Im glad to hear that. Lets remove the bandage. Grab my hand I will help you sit.
The wound had healed well; it was dry and was no longer painful when he peeled the bandage off. She gently touched her cheek and winced. Vysogota knew that it was not from pain. On each occasion anew she ensured the extent of her injury aware of the seriousness of the wound. To ensure – with horror – that what she had touched previously was not a fever-induced nightmare.
Do you have a mirror?
No he lied.
She looked at him perhaps for the first time fully conscious.
Does that mean it is terrible? she asked passing her fingers gently over the stitches.
It is… it is a long deep wound he stammered annoyed with himself for explaining and justifying himself to a brat. Your face is still very swollen. In a few days I will remove the stitches until then I will put willow bark extract on it. You no longer need to have your whole head bound up. The wound heals very well.
She did not answer. She moved her mouth and jaw twisting her face trying to see what her injuries would allow her to do and not do.
Ive made chicken soup. Eat.
Ill eat. But this time by myself. I do not want to have to be fed like a cripple.
She ate for a long time. The wooden spoon was lifted to her mouth gently and with such effort as if it weighed at least two pounds. But she did it without Vysogotas help who watched with interest. Vysogota was curious – and the curiosity was burning. He knew that with the girls return to health an exchange of words would begin that might shed some light on how she mysteriously appeared on the moors. He knew it and could not wait until then. He had spent too much time living alone in the wilderness.
She finished eating and lay down on the cushions. For a while she looked at the ceiling as if dead then turned her head. Her extraordinary green eyes Vysogota thought again gives her face a look of childlike innocence which at the moment shows through her horribly maimed cheek. Vysogota knew this kind of beauty – the large eyes of an eternal child was an appearance that produced instinctive sympathy. A girl eternal even when she is twenty even after her thirtieth birthday had fallen into oblivion. Yes Vysogota knew this kind of beauty. His second wife was the same. His daughter also.
I have to leave here the girl said suddenly. And fast. Im being pursued. You know that.
I know he nodded. These were the first words you said that despite appearances were not delusions. More precisely one of the first. First you asked about your horse and your sword. In that order. When I assured you that your horse and sword were taken care of you came to suspect that I was not an ally of Bonhart and that I was there to heal you not subject you to torture and give you false hope. When not without difficulty you realized your mistake you introduced yourself as Falka and thanked me for rescuing you.
Thats good. She stared at the cushions as if to avoid eye contact. Its good that I remembered to thank you. I remember it like in a fog. I did not know what was true and what was a dream. It bothered me that I had not thanked you. But my name is not Falka.
I also know this but more by chance. You said it during your fever.
I am a fugitive she said without turning her head. A fugitive. It is dangerous to give me shelter. It is dangerous to know my real name. I have to get on my horse and leave before I am discovered…
A while ago he said mildly you had trouble sitting on the chamber pot. I cannot imagine how you could sit on a horse. But I assure you it is safe here. No one will find you here with me.
They are searching for me. They follow my tracks searching the surroundings…
Calm down. Day after day it has been raining and the rain has washed away all tracks. And the area is deserted. Youre in the home of a hermit who has isolated himself from the world. So it is too hard for the world to find him. However if you wish I can find a way to bring you news of your relatives and friends.
You do not even know who I am…
You are a wounded girl he interrupted fleeing from someone who does not hesitate to hurt girls. Do you want me to send a message to someone?
There is no one she said after a moment Vysogota caught the change in her voice. My friends are dead. They were all killed.
He asked no questions.
I am death she continued in a strange voice. Everyone who comes into contact with me dies.
Not everyone he denied firmly. Not Bonhart. The one whose name you screamed out in your dreams that you now want to escape. Your meeting has done more harm to you than to him. Was it he… who wounded your face?
No she pressed her lips together to stifle something that could be a moan or a curse. Kalous was the one who wounded my face. Stefan Skellen. And Bonhart… Bonhart wounded me much deeper. More deeply. Did I talk about it in the fever?
Relax. Youre weak you should avoid sudden movements.
My name is Ciri.
I will prepare a compress of monkshood Ciri.
Wait… could you give me a mirror?
I told you…
Please!
He obeyed he came to the conclusion that it was necessary and it could not wait any longer. He even brought over a candle. So she could see better what had been done to her face.
Well yes she said in a broken voice. Yes it is as I imagined it. Almost like I imagined it.
He departed and pulled the curtain of blankets closed behind him.
She tried to weep quietly so he could not hear. She tried with all her might.
The next day Vysogota pulled out half the stitches. Ciri rubbed her cheek hissing like a snake complaining of severe pain in her ear and hypersensitivity in her neck under her jaw. Still she got up dressed and went outside. Vysogota did not protest but accompanied her. He did not need to help or hold her up. The girl was healthy and was much stronger than she seemed.
Outside however she stumbled. She leaned against the door frame.
It is… she exhaled sharply it is cold! Its nearly freezing. It is winter already? How long have I been in bed? Weeks?
Exactly six days. Today is the fifth day of October. But it seems this October will be unusually cold.
The fifth of October? She frowned and then hissed with pain. How can it be? Two weeks?
What? What is two weeks?
It does not matter. She shrugged her shoulders. Maybe Im wrong… or maybe not. Tell me what stinks here so much?
Skins. Muskrat beaver mink otter and other tanning skins. Even a hermit has to make a living.
Where is my horse?
In the pen.
The black mare greeted them with a loud snort and Vysogotas goat echoed with a bleat which echoed his great displeasure of having to share his accommodation with another tenant. Ciri embraced the horses neck and patted him stroking his mane.
Where is my saddle and saddle bags?
Here.
He did not protest make any comment or express any opinion. He was silent leaning on his cane. He did not move when she gasped while trying to raise her saddle did not flinch when she staggered under the weight and fell awkwardly on the floor covered with straw and released a loud moan. He did not approach her or help her up. He watched carefully.
Well Ciri said through clenched teeth while pushing the mare who was trying to stick his nose through the neck of her shirt. Its clear. But I have to leave here dammit! I have to go!
Where? he asked dryly.
She massaged her face with her hands while sitting on the straw beside the saddle.
As far away as possible.
Vysogota nodded as if the answer satisfied him clarified everything and left no doubt. Ciri rose with effort. She did not even attempt to pick up the saddle and harness. She checked to see if the mare had hay and oats in the pen then began to rub his back and sides with straw. Vysogota waited in silence wanting to see. The girl stumbled onto the pole supporting the roof and turned white as a sheet. Without a word he gave her his cane.
Nothings wrong. Im just…
Just dizzy because you are sick and weak as a newborn. Lets go back. You have to lie down.
Around sunset having previously slept for a few hours Ciri came outside again. Vysogota who had just returned from the river met her at the hedge of hazel bushes.
Do not go far from the hut he warned. Firstly youre too weak…
I feel better.
Secondly it is dangerous. All around are bottomless swamps and endless forests of reeds. You do not know the trails; you could get lost and drown in the marsh.
But she said pointing at the bag he carried on his shoulder you know the trails and of course you travel them whenever you want. It seems to me that the swamps are not so dangerous. You tan hides for a living that is clear. Kelpie my mare had oats and I do not see a field around here in sight. We eat chicken and barley porridge. And bread real bread not cakes. I do not think that you trapped it. So that means there is a village around here.
A faultless deduction he admitted quietly. That means I have received rations from the nearest settlement. The nearest but it does not mean that it is close. It lies on the edge of the marsh. The marsh borders a river. I exchange my furs for food which they bring me in a boat. Bread flour salt cheese and sometimes chicken or rabbit. Occasionally news.
There were no questions so he continued.
Horsemen have arrived in the village. Twice. The first time they threatened the peasants with fire and sword if anyone helped you or hid you. The second time they promised a reward for finding your corpse. Your pursuers think that youve succumbed to your injuries and are lying out here dead somewhere in the forest of fallen trees or brushwood.
And they will not rest until they find my dead body she muttered darkly. I know this well. They must have proof that I am dead. Without this proof they will not give up. They will search everywhere. And eventually they will come here…
They are very interested in you he said. I would even say that they are interested in an extraordinary way…
She pursed her lips.
Do not be afraid. I will go before they find me. I will not expose you to danger… do not be afraid.
Why do you assume that Im afraid? he shrugged his shoulders. What reason is there to be scared? Nobody comes here and nobody will be able to find you here. But if you poke your snout out of the reeds you will come face-to-face with your pursuers.
In other words she threw back her head in a gesture of defiance I have to stay here. Is that what you meant?
Youre not a prisoner. You can leave whenever you like. Rather whenever you are able. But you can also stay here and wait. The time will come when your pursuers will get discouraged. They always get discouraged sooner or later. Always. You can believe me. I know this.
Her green eyes sparkled when she looked at him.
At the end of the day the hermit said quickly while shrugging his shoulders and avoiding her gaze do what you want. I repeat I will not keep you here.
For now I will not go she snorted. I feel weak… and the sun is setting… and I do not know the trails. So lets get back to the hut. Im freezing.
You said Ive been here for six days. Is that true?
Why would I lie?
Dont fret. Im trying to calculate the days… I escaped… I was hurt… The day of the equinox. The twenty-third of September. If you want to count according to the elves the last day of Lammas.
It is not possible.
Why would I lie? she cried and moaned while touching her face. Vysogota looked on calmly.
I do not know he replied calmly. But I used to be a doctor Ciri. It has been a long time but I can still distinguish a wound inflicted in a few hours to a wound that has been untreated for four days. I found you on September twenty-seventh thus you were wounded on the twenty-sixth. The third day of Velen if you prefer to count as the elves do. Three days after the equinox.
I was wounded the day of the equinox.
It is not possible Ciri. You must have mistaken the date.
Absolutely not. You are probably using an outdated calendar hermit.
As you wish. Is it so important?
No. Not at all.
Three days later Vysogota took out the last of the stitches. He had every reason to be pleased and proud of his work – the stitching was straight and clean there was no fear of dirt being tucked in the wound. The surgeons satisfaction was only marred by watching Ciri stare at the scar in gloomy silence trying different angles with a mirror and trying to hide it without success by throwing her hair over her cheek. The scar had disfigured her. A fact is a fact. There was nothing she could do. Nothing could help her pretend that it was not there. Still red and swollen like a rope dotted with the traces of the sting of the needle and marked with the signs of the thread the scar looked truly macabre. It was possible that the condition might show a slow or rapid improvement. However Vysogota knew there was no possibility that the scar would disappear or cease to disfigure her.
Ciri was feeling much better to Vysogotas amazement and satisfaction and no longer spoke of leaving. He took the black mare Kelpie from the pen. Vysogota knew that in the north Kelpie was a sea monster that could according to superstition take the form of horse a dolphin or even a beautiful woman but in its real form it looked a lot like sea weed. Ciri saddled the mare and rode around the pen and hut after which she returned Kelpie to the pen to keep company with the goat. And Ciri returned to the hut to keep Vysogota company.
She started to help him – probably out of boredom – when working with the skins. While he separated the otter skins into size and tone she divided the muskrats in backs and bellies and stretched the skins over a table that they had brought into the house. Her fingers were extremely nimble.
It was during this task that a strange conversation occurred between them.
You do not know who I am. You could not even imagine who I am.
She repeated this trivial statement several times and it bothered him a bit. Of course she failed to notice his annoyance; it would have lowered him to betray his feelings to a brat like that. No he could not let it happen but neither could he betray the curiosity that devoured him.
A curiosity that was unfounded because he could have easily guessed who she was. In the days of Vysogotas youth gangs were not uncommon. The years have passed but it could not eliminate the magnetic force with which these gangs attracted a girl eager for adventure and strong emotions. Which often led to their undoing. The brats who came out of it with a scar on their face could say that they had been lucky. For the less lucky they could expect torture the gibbet the axe or the stake.
Ha from the time of Vysogota only one thing has changed – progressive emancipation. The bands attracted not only the young males but also crazy girls who preferred swords horses and the unbridled life more than needles dishes and waiting for suitors.
Vysogota did not tell her directly but gave her a sufficiently clear note that he knew with whom he was dealing with. To make her aware that if there was a mystery here it was surely not this girl – a girl who was on the road with a gang of bandit teens and had miraculously escaped from a trap. A disfigured brat trying to surround herself with a halo of mystery…
You do not know who I am. But do not worry Ill go soon. I will not expose you to danger.
Vysogota had had enough.
What sort of danger? he asked. Even if your pursuers found you here which I doubt what harm could befall me? Assisting runaway criminals is punishable but not to a hermit since he is not aware of the world. My privilege is to accommodate everyone who comes into my hermitage. Well you say I do not know who you are. How could I a hermit know who you are if you committed a crime and why the law is chasing you? And what law? I do not even know whose law applies in this region and who the representatives of this law are. I do not care and it has never interested me Im a hermit.
He realized he had gone too far. But he would not budge. Her green eyes were full of rage and pierced him like knives.
Im a poor hermit. Dead to the world and its works. I am a simple man uneducated ignorant of worldly affairs…
He exaggerated.
Sure! she cried throwing the skin and the knife onto the floor. Do you take me for a fool? Well do not think that I am so stupid. A simple hermit. When you were gone I looked around your hut. I looked into that corner covered by the curtains. Where you have many books of science on the shelves uh a simple and uneducated man?
Vysogota threw an otter skin onto the pallet.
They belonged to a local tax collector he waved his hand carelessly. When he died the villagers did not know what to do with them and brought them to me. They are land registers and accounting books.
Youre lying. Ciri winced and rubbed her scar. You are clearly lying to me!
He did not answer pretending to evaluate the next skin tone.
You think she continued that because you have a white beard wrinkles and a hundred years on the neck that you can effortlessly fool an innocent girl huh? Well Ill tell you – the first duck to pass through here may have been deceived. But Im not a duck.
He raised his eyebrows in a silent but provocative question. She did not let him wait too long.
I dear hermit I have studied in places where there were many books and with some of the same titles that are on your shelves. I know many of those titles.
Vysogota raised his eyebrows even more. She looked him straight in the eye.
Incredible tales she said you told the ragged tomboy the dirty orphan the thief or bandit you found in the reeds with the smashed face. But you should know sir hermit that I have read The History of the World by Roderick de Novembre. I went over and over again the works that bear the titles Materia Medica and Herbarius which is the same one you have on your shelf. I also know what the ermine cross on a red shield embossed on the backs of your books mean. It is a sign that the books were made at the University of Oxenfurt.
She paused still staring intently. Vysogota was silent; he struggled to make sure his face did not betray anything.
So I think Ciri said throwing back her head in a move that was characteristic of her proud and somewhat violent that you are not a simpleton or a hermit. That you did not leave voluntarily from the world but you ran away from it. And you hide here in the wilds masked between the impassable swamps.
If so Vysogota smiled then our luck has joined in a very strange way my well-read maiden. Destiny has put us together in mysterious ways. At the end of the day you too Ciri are hiding. At the end of the day you too Ciri deftly weave around you a veil of appearances. Im old and full of suspicions and mistrust embittered by age…
Towards me?
Towards the world Ciri. A world where appearances take the deceptive mask of truth to expose other truths but is false as well attempting to deceive. To a world in which the shield of the University of Oxenfurt is painted on the doors of brothels. To a world where a ragged bandit is knowledgeable wise and may even be of noble birth who is an intellectual and scholar who reads Roderick de Novembre and knows the seal of the Academy. Against all appearances. Against the fact that they themselves carry another mark. A criminal tattoo a red rose etched near the groin.
Youre right her lips tightened and her face flushed so intense that the line of the scar was almost black. Youre a bitter old man. And a musty busybody.
On my shelf behind the curtain he said with a nod is the Aen Nog Mab Taedhmorc a collection of short stories and Elven prophecies. In there is a story that fits this situation and conversation. It is the story of the old raven and the swallow. Just like you Ciri Im a scholar so I would like to recite a short passage. I hope my memory does not disappoint. The raven as I remember accuses the swallow of rashness and inappropriate levity:
Hen Cerbin dicss aen nog Zireael
Aark aark caelm foile tee veloe ell?
Zireael…
He stopped and leaned his elbows on the table and placed his chin onto his extended fingers. Ciri shook her head straightened up and looked at him defiantly. She finished the poem.
…Zireael veloe quess aen enssan irch
Ma bog Hen Cerbin vean ni quirk quirk!
The embittered suspicious old man Vysogota said after a moment of silence apologizes to the educated maiden. The old raven who sensed fraud and deceit everywhere begs forgiveness from the swallow whose only fault is that it is young and full of life. And pretty…
Now youre raving she grumbled covering the scar on her face in an unconscious movement. You can save the compliments. They will not mend the scar left on my skin. Dont think that that is how you are going to win my trust. I still do not know who you really are. Why you lied to me about the days and dates. And why you looked between my legs when the wound was on my face. And if you were limited to just looking…
This time she managed to upset him.
How dare you kid? he cried. I could be your father!
My grandfather she corrected him icily. Or my great-grandfather. But youre not. I do not know who you are. But surely not the person you are pretending to be.
I am the one who found you in the swamp nearly frozen to the bone with a black mask instead of a face unconscious filthy and dirty. I am the one who brought you home but did not know who you were and had the right to imagine the worst. Who cured you and lay you on a bed. Gave you medicine when you were burning with fever. Who took care of you. I washed you. Very carefully. Also in the vicinity of the tattoo.
Ciri calmed down but her eyes did not lose the challenging and insolent look.
In this world she snapped there are those with deceptive appearances that put on a mask of truth as you yourself have said. I also know a little about how this world works. You saved me treated and cured me. Thank you. I am gratefully for your… kindness. But I know there is no kindness without…
Self interest and hope of a favor he finished with a smile. Yes I know. I am a man of the world who knows the world as well as you Ciri. Young women who have been deprived of everything that has any value. If you are unconscious or too weak to defend yourselves they usually give free rein to lust and appetite often depraved or unnatural. Is it not true?
Nothing is as it seems Ciri replied blushing again.
An accurate statement said the hermit while adding another skin to the appropriate lot. And how inevitably it leads to the conclusion that we Ciri we know nothing about each other. We know only the appearances and they lie.
He waited a moment but Ciri did not hasten to say anything.
Although we both have succeeded in making a preliminary inquiry we still dont know anything. I do not know who you are you do not know who I am…
This time he deliberately waited. She looked at him and her eyes burned with the question he was expecting. Her eyes flashed when she asked:
Who will start?
If someone had crept up to the dark hut with the sunken overgrown-with-moss roof and if they looked inside in the firelight of the hearth they would have seen an old man with a white beard hunched over bundles of skins. They would have also seen a girl with ashen-hair with an ugly scar on her cheek a scar that did not fit at all with the green eyes as big as a childs.
But nobody could see. The hut was lost in the endless field of reeds in the middle of a swamp where no one dared to enter.
My name is Vysogota of Corvo. I was a doctor a surgeon. I was an alchemist. Later I worked as a researcher a philosopher and an ethicist. I was a professor at the University of Oxenfurt. I had to flee from there after publishing some work that was considered impious and heretical. Then fifty years ago that charge carried the death penalty. I went into exile. My wife did not want to immigrate so she left me. While on the run I stopped in the far south in the Nilfgaardian Empire. I settled down after a while and became a professor of philosophy and ethics at the Imperial Academy in Castell Graupian. I served in that position for almost ten years. Then history repeated – I had to flee after the publication of a certain treatise… Which by the way dealt with the totalitarian regime and the criminal nature of the wars of occupation but officially my work was branded as clerical heresy and metaphysical mysticism. An investigation showed that I was a lackey of expansive and revisionist clergy circles that were effectively ruling the Nordling Kingdoms. It seemed like a grim joke considering that these priestly circles had twenty years before issued me with a death sentence for atheism. In fact it had been a long time since the priests in the North had lost their influence but in Nilfgaard they refused to acknowledge it. Combining mysticism and politics was prosecuted and punished without mercy.
Today judging from the perspective of years I think if I had humbled myself and had shown remorse Im certain the matter would have been settled and I would have just fallen into disgrace with the emperor without having to resort to drastic means. But I was outraged. I was sure of my truth; it was timeless and superior to any policy. I felt an injustice. I was unjustly wronged by the ruling tyrannies. I had established active contacts with dissidents seeking to overthrow the tyranny. Before I could realize I was thrown into prison with my new friends. Some of them when the executioner showed them his tools identified me as the chief ideologue of the underground movement. But before I was executed I was saved by the imperial grace and I was sentenced into exile – under threat of immediate execution of the original sentence if I ever returned to imperial lands.
I then got mad at the world with the kingdoms empires and universities with the dissidents civil servants and lawyers. With colleagues and friends who as if by magic did not want to know me. With my second wife who similar to the first thought that her husbands problems were reason enough for divorce. With my children I gave up. I became a hermit. Here in Ebbing in the swamps of Pereplut. I took over the hut where a hermit used to live. With all the bad luck I had Nilfgaard annexed Ebbing. So before I could settle in I found myself again in imperial territory. I had no desire nor the energy to make another journey and so I decided to hide. Imperial verdicts are never time-barred even when the Emperor who issued it is long dead and the current emperor has had little reason to recall it. The death sentence remains in force as is the custom and law in Nilfgaard. Sentences for high treason do not expire and are not subject to amnesty. At the coronation of every new emperor everyone is pardoned who was denounced by his predecessor – except for traitors. Therefore it makes no difference to me who sits on the throne – if I violate the decision of the court to exile me and if I am arrested my head will fall on the scaffold.
So you see dear Ciri we are both in a similar situation.
What is ethics? I knew but I have forgotten.
The science of morality. The rules of customary behavior nobility benevolence and honesty. From the heights of good which elevates the human soul to morality and righteousness. And from the depth of evil which brings it down to wickedness and immorality…
The heights of good! she snorted. Righteousness! Morality! Dont make me laugh or youll make my scar open up again. You had the devils own luck that they didnt manage to send a bounty hunter such as… Bonhart. You learned the depth of evil. Ethics? To hell with your ethics Vysogota of Corvo. It is not the wicked and immoral people who sink into the abyss no! Oh no! There are the bad but determined and there are those who are decent honest and noble but clumsy hesitant but full of scruples.
Thank you for your teachings he said jokingly. Believe me even if you live for a century it is never too late to learn something new. Truly it is always helpful to hear from mature people who have experienced the world.
Laugh she shook her head. Laugh while you can because now it is my turn. Now Ill entertain you with a story. Ill tell you what happened to me. And when Im finished well see if you still want to joke.
If someone had crept up to the hut in the swamp after dark and looked through a crack in the shutters and saw into the room he would have seen in the dim light a white-bearded old man intently listening to an ashen-haired girl sitting on a stump by the fire. He would see that she speaks slowly as if it was hard to find words nervously rubbing her cheek that was distorted by a scar and intertwined with long moments of silence tells the story of her fate. A story about teaching she received that proved to be all false and misleading. On the promises made to her that had not been kept. A story about doom where she learned to believe but was shamefully betrayed. The fact that every time she was beginning to hope for a change for the better she was subjected to humiliation. Humiliation injustice and pain. The fact that those who she trusted and loved betrayed her did not come to her aid when she was threatened with violation suffering and death. The councils that according to people should be true to their ideals failed whenever they wanted to build and thus proved to be useless. The help friendship and love of those in which support and friendship had never been looked for – to say nothing about love.
But no one could see or hear. The hut with the sunken roof was enveloped in an impenetrable fog in a swamp where no one dared to go.
When a young girl enters adolescence dreams examine hitherto inaccessible areas which are represented by a hidden chamber… As the girl approaches the fateful spot she has to climb a spiral staircase and in dreams those stairs typically mean sexual experiences. She passes over the stairs to a small locked door which has a key in the lock… A small locked room in dreams often means the vagina the turn of the key in a lock symbolizes the sex act.
Bruno Bettelheim
The Uses of Enchantment
CHAPTER TWO
The west wind ushered in a night-time thunderstorm.
The purple-black sky cracked with lines of lightning and exploded with persistent rumbles of thunder. A downpour began pelting the dusty road roofs and dirt-smeared windows with drops as thick as oil. The strong wind continued and soon drove the rain and the storm somewhere far beyond the lightning blazing horizon.
And then the dogs started barking. Hooves were drumming weapons rattling. A wild hooting and whistling woke the sleeping villagers making their hair stand on end. They jumped up hastily and locked doors and windows with iron bars. Sweaty hands clutched axes and pitchfork handles. They clasped them firmly. And yet helplessly.
Terror terror was flying through the village. Hunters or the hunted? Cruel and insane with rage or fear? Will they dash through without slowing the horses? Or will the night be illuminated with the light of burning thatch and fire?
Hush hush child…
Mama are they demons? Is this the Wild Hunt? Specters from hell? Mama Mama!
Peace peace children. These are not demons not devils.
Worse.
They are people.
The dogs barked. A gale was blowing. Horses whinnied and horseshoes pounded.
Through the village through the night to chase the riff-raff.
Hotsporn came riding over the crest of the hill halting his horse and turning it sideways. He was careful cautious and did not take any chances especially not when vigilance cost nothing. He was in no hurry to ride down the river to the post office. He preferred to examine it thoroughly first.
Neither horses nor carriages were at the station there was only a small wagon drawn by a pair of mules. Writing could be seen on its canvas roof though Hotsporn could not decipher it from the distance. But it did not smell like danger. Hotsporn knew how to sense danger. He was a professional.
He rode on over the entangled bank covered in scrub and willow bushes then decided to drive his horse into the river. He galloped through splashing water up over his saddle. The ducks on the banks honked loudly and fled.
Hotsporn drove the horse on and rode into the yard of the station through a gap in the fence. Now he could read the writing on the wagon canvas; it said: Master Alma Vera Tattoo Artist. Each word of the inscription was painted a different color and began with a particularly large richly illuminated letter. The front right wagon wheel was emblazoned with a mark—a forked purple arrow.
Dismount said a voice from behind him. Get on the ground now! Hands off the hilt!
They had surrounded him silently – to the right was Asse in a black leather jacket laced with silver threads – to the left was Falka in a green suede jacket with feathers in her beret. Hotsporn pulled down his hood and the scarf covering his face.
Ha! Asse lowered his sword. Hotsporn. I would have recognized you but this black horse had me fooled!
Thats a beautiful mare Falka said enthusiastically pushing the beret off her ear. As black and shiny as coal not a hair lighter. And graceful! Oh what a beauty!
Well I got her for just under a hundred florens. Hotsporn smiled carelessly. Where is Giselher? Inside?
Asse nodded. Falka stared at the mare spellbound and patted her neck. When she galloped through the water – she looked at Hotsporn with her large green eyes – She was like the purest Kelpie! If you would have come from the sea instead of the river I wouldve sworn this was a Kelpie.
Has Miss Falka ever seen a real Kelpie?
Only once in a picture. The girls face suddenly clouded over. That would be a long story. Go inside. Giselher is waiting.
Light filtered through the window and shone on a table. On that table sat Mistle leaning back on her elbows and naked from the waist down clothed in nothing but black stockings. Between her shamelessly spread legs knelt a lean long-haired individual in a gray-brown coat. That could be none other than Master Alma Vera the tattoo artist because he was just about to bite a colorful picture into Mistles leg.
Come closer Giselher motioned for Hotsporn to take an empty stool at the table where he sat with Spark Kayleigh and Reef. The latter two were dressed similarly to Asse in black calf leather jackets which were littered with buckles rivets chains and other fanciful embellishments of silver. They must have originally belonged to some craftsman thought Hotsporn. If they liked something the Rats would pay tailors shoemakers and saddlers truly regal fees. Of course they also simply stole peoples clothing or jewelry if something caught their eye.
You found our message in the ruins of the old station? continued Giselher. Ha of course you did otherwise you would not be here yes. I must admit you have come quickly.
Because of his beautiful mare interjected Falka. I bet it is fast!
I found your message. Hotsporn did not look away from Giselher. But what about mine? Has it reached you?
Has it… the leader of the Rats began to hum and haw. But… well in short… we havent had time. First we got drunk and had to cut back for a while. And later we had to go somewhere else…
Damn bastards thought Hotsporn.
In short you have not executed the order?
N-no. Excuse me Hotsporn. It did not fit… but next time oho! Absolutely!
Absolutely! Kayleigh emphatically confirmed although no one had asked him for a confirmation.
Damn irresponsible bastards. You got drunk. And then you had to go elsewhere. Elsewhere being where you found those unusual clothes no doubt.
Will you have a drink with us?
No thank you.
Or perhaps some of this? Giselher pointed to an ornate paint jar that stood between the jugs and tankards. Hotsporn now knew whence came the strange glint in the eyes of the Rats and why their movements were so nervous and fast.
First-class dust assured Giselher. Will you take a pinch?
No thank you. Hotsporn cast an eloquent glance at a blood stain and a vanishing trail in the sawdust which revealed the path a corpse had been dragged. Giselher noticed the look.
That marks the death of the postmasters servant who wanted to act like a hero he snarled. Until Spark made an example of him.
Spark let out a throaty laugh. You could see immediately that she was exhilarated by the powerful narcotic. I made an example of him only so that blood gushed she boasted. And immediately after the others stayed peaceful. This is called terrorism!
As usual she was draped with jewelry – she even had a small diamond ring in her nostrils. She wore no leather but instead a cherry-red brocade jacket with a pattern that was already becoming the latest fashion among wealthy youths. The same was true with the silk cloth wrapped around the head of Giselher. Hotsporn had even heard of girls who cut their hair like Mistles.
That is called terrorism he repeated thoughtfully still staring at the trail of blood on the floor. And the postmaster? His wife? Their son?
No no. Giselher frowned. Do you think we slaughter everyone? Where did you get that idea? We have temporarily locked them in the pantry. The station as you can see belongs to us now.
Kayleigh noisily flushed his mouth with wine and spat on the floor. Using a spoon he took a pinch from the casket of Fisstech licked the tip of his index finger sprinkled it on carefully and rubbed the anesthetic into his gums. He gave the jar to Falka who repeated the ritual and passed it to Reef. The Nilfgaardian who was busy trying to look through a catalogue of colored tattoos refused and gave the jar to Spark. The elf passed it on to Giselher without making use of it.
Terror hissed Spark narrowing her glinting eyes and sniffling. With its help we conquered this station! Emperor Emhyr does it to the entire world we only to this hovel. But the principle is the same!
Owww dammit! cried Mistle from the table. Watch where you poke that thing! Do that again and Ill stab you! Straight through!
The Rats – except Falka and Giselher – roared with laughter.
If you want to be beautiful you have to suffer! called Spark.
Dont worry master added Kayleigh. Between the legs is inured to you!
Falka threw a filthy curse at him followed by a tankard. Kayleigh ducked and again the Rats laughed loudly.
Hotsporn decided to put an end to the mirth. So the station is in terror. And for what? Apart from the satisfaction of terrorizing people?
We are here in ambush said Giselher while he rubbed Fisstech into his gums. If someone comes here to change horses or to take a rest we take them out. This brings in more than any crossroads in the wild or fork on the road. But like Spark has just said the principle is the same.
But weve been here the whole day today and all we got was this said Reef while he pointed to Master Alma Vera whose whole head had nearly disappeared between Mistles splayed thighs. A pauper like all artists. He has nothing to steal so we rob him of his art. Take a look at how clever he is at drawing.
He bared his arm and showed a tattoo – a naked woman who moved her buttocks when he clenched his fist. Kayleigh also had one – twisted around his arm above the spiked bracelet was a green snake with its mouth open and a scarlet red forked tongue.
Very tasteful Hotsporn said with indifference in his voice. And helpful in the identification of corpses. But the robbery went wrong dear Rats. You will have to pay the artist for his art. There was no opportunity to warn you: for seven days since the first of September the sign of safe passage has been a purple forked arrow. The same sign that is painted on his wagon.
Reef swore softly and Kayleigh began to laugh. Giselher waved indifferently.
Oh well. If need be he will be paid for his needles and inks. A purple arrow you say? We will remember. If somebody comes up tomorrow with the character of the arrow nothing will happen to him.
Youre going to stay here tomorrow? Hotsporn was surprised and a bit incredulous. Foolish you Rats. Risky and dangerous!
How?
Risky and dangerous.
Giselher shrugged his shoulders. Spark spluttered and spit on the floor. Reef Kayleigh and Falka looked at Hotsporn as if he had just informed them that the sun had fallen into the river and they had to fish it out quickly before it was cut to pieces by crab claws. Hotsporn realized that he had just appealed to the reason of crazy brats. That the people he was warning of risk and danger were braggarts filled with insane bravado – people who were not familiar with the concepts of risk or danger.
You are being hunted Rats.
So what?
The discussion was interrupted by Mistle who approached them without taking the trouble to get dressed. She put one foot on the bench turned her hips and showed the world the work of Master Alma Vera: a fiery red rose on a green stem with two leaves situated directly on the leg near the groin.
Well? she asked and put her hands on her hips. Diamonds sparkled on her many bracelets which covered her arms almost to her elbows. What say you?
One thing is prettier than the other! Kayleigh snorted and brushed back his hair. Hotsporn noticed that the Rats ears were pierced and he wore small rings in them. Doubtless before long such rings – as well as metal-studded leather jackets – would be the latest fashion among the wealthy youth throughout Thum and Geso.
Your turn Falka said Mistle. What do you want to make you stand out?
Falka touched her legs leaned down and looked at the tattoo. Up close. Mistle tousled her ash-blond hair tenderly. Falka began to giggle and undress without ceremony.
I want a rose she said. In the very same place as yours darling.
I think you might have mice Vysogota. Ciri interrupted her story and looked at the floor where the light from the small lamp illuminated a true tournament of mice. One could only imagine what was going on outside the glow of the lamp in the dark.
You could use a cat. Or better still two cats.
The rodents – the hermit cleared his throat – come to the hut because winter is coming. And I have a cat. But its gone off somewhere the faithless…
It must have been bitten by a fox or a raccoon.
You have not seen this cat Ciri. If he has been bitten by anything it would be a dragon. Nothing smaller.
So it was a tomcat? Ha too bad. He would not allow these mice to crawl into bed with me. Too bad.
Too bad. But I think he will come back. He always comes back.
Ill put some wood on the fire. Its cold.
Cold. The nights are devilishly cold now… and its not even mid-October… Go on Ciri.
Ciri sat motionless for a moment gazing into the fire pit. The fire rose around the newly placed log. It began to crackle and hiss. It threw a golden glow and darting shadows on the disfigured face of the girl.
Tell.
Master Alma Vera stabbed and Ciri could feel tears gathering in the corners of her eyes. Although she had prepared herself with wine and the white powder the pain was unbearable. She had to grit her teeth to stifle her moans. But of course she did not moan. She acted as if she didnt even notice the needles and didnt give a damn about the pain. She tried to continue as if nothing was happening to participate in the conversation the Rats were having with Hotsporn. He was an individual who pretended to be a businessman but had nothing to do with trade as it was practiced by the merchants.
Dark clouds have gathered over your heads said Hotsporn gravely letting his dark eyes roam over the room and the faces of each of the Rats. Not only is the governor of Amarillo hunting you but also Varnhagen and Baron Casadei…
The Baron? Giselher grimaced. The governor and the Varnhagens I can understand but what does Casadei have against us?
Hotsporn grinned. The wolf puts on sheeps clothing and starts bleating pitifully baa baa nobody likes me no one understands me. When I look to leave they throw stones at me screaming be off! Why must I suffer such insults and injustice? – The daughter of the Baron Casadei dear Rats is in poor health after the escapade at Stelzbach and still has a fever…
Ahhh recalled Giselher. The coach with four tabby horses! Was that the lady?
Yes. Now as I said she suffers. She wakes up screaming in the night remembering the Lord Kayleigh… and in particular Miss Falka. And the brooch a memento from her dear mother that was violently torn from her dress by Miss Falka. Where Miss Falka said all sorts of things.
Thats not at all what happened! Ciri shouted from the table glad to have the opportunity to cry and vent her pain. We were reserved and respectful towards the Baroness and we let them go free! Someone should have fucked the maid!
Indeed. Ciri felt Hotsporns gaze on her bare thighs. It was truly a great insult to not fuck the maid. Its no wonder then that Casadei drummed up his wrath armed his House and offered a reward. He has publicly vowed to hang all of your heads from the corbels of his castle walls. He has also vowed that for the brooch torn from his daughters dress Miss Falka will have the skin torn from her. In strips.
Ciri cursed while the other Rats laughed and yelled. Spark sneezed and spit – a result of the Fisstech provoking her mucosa.
We are always hunted! she said as she wiped her nose mouth chin and the table with a cloth. The governor the Baron the Varnhagens! They pursue us but they do not understand! We are the Rats! We doubled back three times behind the river Velde and now these idiots are on a mad hunt along a cold trail. By the time they notice it is a false trail they will be too far to turn back.
They should turn back! said Asse who had come in a little while ago from his guard post. No one had replaced him and no one made any move to replace him now. Then we will take them in the rear!
Exactly! shouted Ciri from the table who had already forgotten how afraid she had been the night before—when they had been fleeing pursuers throughout the small villages by the Velde.
Enough Giselher slapped his palm on the table and the loud chatter stopped immediately. Speak Hotsporn. I can see that you want to tell us something something more important than the governor Varnhagen or Baron Casadei and his sensitive daughter.
Bonhart is tracking you.
There was a silence an unusually long silence. Even Master Alma Vera stopped for a moment to listen.
Bonhart repeated Giselher slowly. The old gray bastard. We must have really stepped on someones toes.
Someone rich confirmed Mistle. Not many could afford Bonhart.
Ciri was about to ask what this Bonhart was but before she had the chance the same question was spoken simultaneously by Reef and Asse.
It is a bounty hunter explained Giselher gloomily. He started as a soldier then became a travelling trader and has finally succumbed to killing people for reward. He is a son-of-a-bitch beyond compare.
He is Kayleigh said rather carelessly. If everyone Bonhart has killed were buried in the same cemetery it would be a half acre in size.
Mistle sprinkled a little white powder in the hollow between her thumb and forefinger and snorted it violently up her nose.
Bonhart destroyed the gang of the Big Lothar she said. He stabbed him and his brother the one they called the Toadstool.
More like he stabbed them in the back accused Kayleigh.
He also killed Valdez added Giselher. And when Valdez was dead his gang disintegrated. They were one of the best. A decent crowd wherever something was happening. Good buddies. I once thought of joining them. Before we teamed up.
True said Hotsporn. The likes of the Valdez gang will not be seen again soon. People sing songs about their escape from Sarda where they had been surrounded by Varnhagens. Yes those were firebrands and cavalier daredevils filled with gentlemanly bravado! Hardly anyone could compete with them.
The Rats suddenly fell silent and stared at him with angry flashing eyes.
We Kayleigh said after a while have beaten a squadron of six of Nilfgaardian cavalry!
We have bested the Nissiren growled Asse.
Hardly anyone can compete hissed Reef with us!
Thats right Hotsporn. Giselher thumped himself in the chest. The Rats are second to none not even the gang of Valdez. Gentlemanly bravado did you say? Let me tell you of ladies of excessive bravado. Three of them are sitting right here – Spark Mistle and Falka. They were riding in broad daylight through the small town Druigh when they learned a group of Varnhagens were sitting in the tavern. So they went galloping through the tavern! Through it! And out into the front yard. The Varnhagens sat there with smashed tankards spilled beer and their mouths hanging open. Do you dare say it was not bravado?
He does not say Mistle answered his question with a malicious smile. He does not say because he knows who the Rats are. His guild knows it.
Master Alma Vera had finished the tattoo. Ciri thanked him with a regal expression dressed and sat down with the others. She hissed as she noticed Hotsporns strange appraising – and somewhat mocking – stare. She looked at him askance and snuggled ostentatiously close to Mistles shoulder. She had already had practice cooling mens zeal and attentions after such romantic demonstrations. However in the case of Hotsporn it was rather unnecessary since the pseudo-merchant was not blatant in this regard.
Hotsporn was a mystery to Ciri. She had only seen him once before the rest had been told to her by Mistle. Giselher said Hotsporn and he had known each other for a long time and were buddies. They had agreed signals slogans and meeting places. At such meetings Hotsporn supplied the information – then the Rats rode to the specified road and ambushed the specified convoy or merchant. Sometimes a specified person was killed. There was always a mark of safe passage – merchants with this sign may not be attacked.
Initially Ciri was surprised and a little disappointed – she had looked up to Giselher with admiration. The Rats seemed to be a model for freedom and independence and she loved this freedom this contempt for everything and everyone. And now suddenly she had to fulfil orders as a mercenary captor is told by his superiors who they should beat. Not only did they carry out orders but they obeyed with big ears.
One hand washes the other Mistle had said with a shrug when Ciri asked her about it. Hotsporn gives us commands but he also gives information thanks to which we survive. Freedom and contempt have their limits. In the end it is always the case that one is someone elses tool.
Thats life little Falcon.
Ciri was surprised and disappointed but she quickly overcame it. She learned. She also learned not to be very surprised and not to expect too much – because then the disappointment did not hurt so much.
I dear Rats said Hotsporn pulling Ciri out of her reflection have a cure for all your troubles. Against the Nissire Barons governors even against Bonhart. Yes yes. Even though the noose tightens around your neck I know a way to save your skin.
Spark spluttered and Reef laughed out loud. But Giselher commanded silence with a gesture and let Hotsporn continue.
It means the merchant said after a pause that in the next few days an amnesty will be proclaimed. Even if someone is legally convicted ha even if someone is already on the gallows he will be forgiven if he confesses. This applies to you too.
Bullshit! yelled Kayleigh with slightly watery eyes a result of the pinch of Fisstech he had just sniffed. A Nilfgaardian trick a deception! Old hares like us do not fall for such rubbish!
Enough! Giselher held him back. Do not get too excited Kayleigh. Hotsporn as you know does not ramble gossip or repeat useless information. He usually knows what he says and why. Im sure he knows where this sudden Nilfgaardian generosity comes from and Im certain he will tell us.
Emperor Emhyr said Hotsporn quietly is going to take a wife. We will soon have an Empress in Nilfgaard. That is why amnesty is being proclaimed. The Emperor is extremely happy and wants to make others happy as well.
The happiness of the Emperor does not concern me one bit Mistle announced patiently. And as for this amnesty I would prefer not to take advantage of it because to me this Nilfgaardian mercy somehow smells of fresh wood shavings. As if they were sharpening a stake haha!
I do not think answered Hotsporn with a shrug that this is a ruse. It is a political matter. And a great one. Greater than the Rats. Greater than all of the local mobs together. This is about politics.
Why the amnesty then? Giselher frowned. I dont understand the point.
Emperor Emhyrs marriage is politically motivated and with the help of this marriage certain policy objectives could be achieved. The Emperor creates this marriage this union because he wants to unite the empire even more to halt the border conflicts and to bring peace. After all do you know who he is marrying? Cirilla heir to the throne of Cintra!
Liar! yelled Ciri. You liar!
Why is Miss Falka calling me a liar? Hotsporn turned his eyes to her. Is she perhaps even better informed?
Always!
Quiet Falka. Giselher frowned. You remained quiet on the table while they stabbed you in the buttocks and now you yell? Whats that Cintra Hotsporn? Whats a Cirilla? Why should this be so important?
Cintra interjected Reef while he sprinkled Fisstech on his finger is a little country in the north which has been fought over by the Empire and the local rulers for three or four years now.
True confirmed Hotsporn. The imperialists have subjected Cintra and even crossed the Yarra River but later had to withdraw.
Because they took a beating on the hill of Sodden growled Ciri. They have become so withdrawn that they would lose to a whiskers underpants!
I see Miss Falka is familiar with the latest story. Commendable very commendable at such a young age. May I ask where Miss Falka is going to school?
You may not!
Enough Giselher called them back to order. Talk of this Cintra Hotsporn. And of the amnesty.
The Emperor Emhyr said the merchant has decided to make Cintra an ivy state…
A what?
An ivy state. As ivy cannot exist without a powerful trunk upon which to grow. And naturally this trunk is Nilfgaard. There are already such states for example Metinna Maecht Toussaint… the local dynasties still rule there. Though only in appearance of course.
Theyre called puppet-states boasted Reef.
Ive heard the term.
The problem with Cintra however was that the royal line had been extinguished there…
Extinguished? For a moment it looked as if green sparks were about to shoot from Ciris eyes. Extinguished due to the fact that the Nilfgaardians murdered Queen Calanthe! Nothing but common murderers!
I confess Hotsporn gestured for Giselher to reseat himself because he had risen at Ciris repeated interference that Miss Falkas knowledge continues to shine brilliantly here. Queen Calanthe has indeed fallen during the war. Also supposedly killed was Cirilla her granddaughter the last of the royal blood. So Emhyr did not have much to work with to create as Mr. Reef has so wisely identified a puppet-state. But since Cirilla has suddenly been found the story of her death must have only been a fabrication.
All stories are snorted Spark leaning on Giselhers shoulder.
Indeed Hotsporn nodded one must admit its a little bit like a fairy tale. It is said that an evil sorceress held this Cirilla captive in a magical tower somewhere far in the north. But she – Cirilla not the witch – was able to flee and seek asylum in the empire.
That is one big bloody clusterfuck of lies and nonsense! Ciri burst out and reached for the jar of Fisstech with trembling hands.
That may be Hotsporn continued slowly but Emperor Emhyr proclaimed that he fell helplessly in love with her at first sight and he now wants to take her to be his wife.
The little Falcon is right said Mistle decisively emphasizing her words by banging her fist on the table. This is fucking nonsense! I dont pretend to understand what this is about. But one thing is certain: to place any hope in this nonsense of grace and mercy from Nilfgaard would be even greater nonsense.
Right agreed Reef. The marriage of the Emperor is not our concern. And if the Emperor that I know is marrying someone another fiancée awaits us. The hemp noose!
Its not about your necks dear Rats Hotsporn reminded them. Its about politics. The northern borders of the Empire have constantly had rebellions riots and unrest especially in this Cintra and the surrounding areas. If the Emperor marries the heir of Cintra then Cintra will calm down. There will be a formal amnesty and the rebel groups will come down from the mountains no longer bothering the Imperials or making trouble. What I can tell you is this: if a Cintrierin ascends the imperial throne rebels will be enlisted in the Imperial army. And you know that in the north across the river Yarra war is waged and every soldier is needed.
Aha Kayleigh grimaced. Now I understand! What a wonderful amnesty! You only have one choice: the sharpened stake here and now or the imperial colors. Either the stake in your ass or the colors on your back. And off to war to die for the Empire!
Off to war said Hotsporn slowly. Yes some will go off to war in the way of song. But it does not mean all have to go to war dear Rats. You can also – after you fulfil the conditions of the amnesty of course – carry out a kind of…alternative service.
What?
I know what he means. Giselhers teeth flashed briefly in his sun-scorched blue-shaven visage. The merchants guild children would like to adopt us. To press us against their chest and protect us. Like they were our mother.
More like our Madame muttered Spark. Hotsporn pretended not to hear her.
Youre right Giselher he said coolly. The guild can transfer you. Officially as a community service. And grant you protection. Officially and alternatively.
Kayleigh was about to speak and Mistle also wanted to say something but a quick glance from Giselher shut their mouths tight.
Submit to the guild… said the leader of the Rats in an icy tone. We are grateful for the offer. We will think it over – contemplate it and discuss it amongst ourselves. What will you do now?
Hotsporn stood. I will ride off.
Now? Without resting for the night?
Ill rest in the village overnight. This station does not strike me as a safe location. And tomorrow straight on to the border of Metinna then on to the main road to Forgeham where Im going to stop until the equinox perhaps longer. Ill be waiting there namely for people who have already thought it over and are ready to come forward and accept my protection under the amnesty. And I have some parting advice for you you should not waste too much time in reflection and contemplation. Because Bonhart will anticipate the amnesty.
The way you keep trying to frighten us with Bonhart Giselher said slowly and stood up youd think the bastard was right on our doorstep… Im sure he is far away over hill and dale…
… in the village of Jealousy Hotsporn quietly finished the sentence. At the inn The Chimeras Head. About thirty miles from here. If you wouldnt have doubled back behind the Velde yesterday you would have met him by now.
But you dont care about that Im sure. Good luck Giselher. Take care Rat. Master Alma Vera? I ride for Metinna and I am always happy to travel with a companion… What say you Master? Happy? I thought so. Gather your belongings. Rats – pay the master for his artistic work.
The post office smelled of fried onions and sour potato soup prepared by the wife of the postmaster who had been temporarily released from the pantry. The candle on the table gleamed and flickered the tongue of flame moving back and forth. The Rats were bent so low over the table that their flame-warmed heads almost collided with each other.
Hes in Jealousy Giselher said quietly. At the Chimeras Head inn. Hardly a days ride from here. What do you think?
The same as you growled Kayleigh. We ride over there and kill the son of a bitch.
Avenge Valdez said Reef. And Toadstool.
And no more hissed Spark will Hotsporn or anyone else praise the bravado of others more than ours. They will see us deal with this Bonhart this monster this wolf man. They will see us nail his head to the door of the inn so that the inn matches its name. They will see that he is not all that wonderful on the end of a great pike but mortal like everyone else and that he finally met his match. They will see who the best gang from Korath to Pereplut is.
There will be songs sung about us at fairs Kayleigh said ardently. Ha and in palaces!
Lets ride. Asse pounded his fist on the table. Lets ride and kill the bastard!
And afterwards considered Giselher we will think over this amnesty…over the guild… Whats wrong with you Kayleigh you look as though youve swallowed a bug? Pursuers are on our heels and soon it will be winter. Here is my plan Rats: we will spend the winter warming our backsides by the heat of the fireplace. The amnesty will protect us from the cold weather and give us moderately warmed beer to drink. We will endure quite well under this amnesty… until it is just about spring. And in the spring… as soon as the grass peeks out from beneath the snow…
The Rats were laughing in unison quietly and menacingly. Their eyes lit up like real rats when they come to a dark corner at night and find a wounded man who cannot defend himself.
Lets drink said Giselher. To Bonhart biting the dust! Well want to finish this soup and head to bed. And sleep well because we leave at dawn.
Sure snorted Spark. Look to Mistle and Falka for an example. Theyve already been in bed for an hour.
The wife of the postmaster winced at the cooking pot when she heard the low vicious disgusting giggles coming from the table.
Ciri raised her head and remained silent a long time gazing at the barely glowing flames of the lamp in which the last of the remaining oil burned.
Then I crept like a thief out of the station she resumed her narrative. Before morning when it was still dark… but I was not able to escape unnoticed. Mistle must have woken when I rose from the bed. She caught me in the barn while I saddled my horse. But she showed no surprise. She didnt even try to hold me back… dawn was approaching already…
Dawn also approaches now Vysogota yawned. Time to sleep Ciri. Tell me more tomorrow.
Maybe youre right. She also yawned got up and stretched herself vigorously. I can barely keep my eyes open. But at this rate hermit Im never going to finish. How many evenings are behind us? At least ten. Im afraid the whole story will take me a thousand and one nights.
We have time Ciri. We have time.
From whom do you flee little Falcon? From me? Or from you?
Im done with fleeing. Now I want to catch something. Therefore I must return… to where it all began. I have to. Understand that Mistle.
So thats why… why you were kind to me today. For the first time after so many days… One last time before the parting? And then forgotten?
Ill never forget you Mistle.
You will.
Never. I promise you. And that was not the last time. Ill find you. Ill come get you… Ill come in a six-horse gilded coach. With a retinue of courtiers. Youll see. Soon I will have… possibilities. Great possibilities. I will make sure that your fate changes… Youll see. You will convince yourself how much I am able. How much I am able to change.
That would require a lot of power sighed Mistle. And mighty magic…
Thats possible. Ciri licked her lips. Even magic… with which I can find… everything that I once lost can return… and belong to me again. I promise you youll be surprised if we meet again.
Mistle turned her close-cropped head away and looked at the blue and pink stripes which the dawn was already painting on the eastern edge of the world.
Indeed she said quietly. Ill be very surprised if we meet again. If I ever see you again. Now get riding already. We do not want to draw this out.
Wait for me. Ciri sniffed. And dont get yourself killed. Think on the amnesty Hotsporn spoke of. Even if Giselher and the others dont want it… but you think about it Mistle. It might be a way to survive. Because I will come back for you. I swear it.
Kiss me.
Dawn broke. The brightness increased along with the cold.
I love you Mistle.
I love you little Falcon. Now get riding already.
Of course she did not believe me. She was convinced I wouldnt be able to handle the anxiety of riding after Hotsporn that she would have to find and rescue me and that in the end I would beg her pardon. How could she know what feelings had come over me when I heard Hotsporn speak of Cintra of my grandmother… Calanthe. When he assumed that any Cirilla would become the wife of the Emperor of Nilfgaard. The same Emperor who had murdered my grandmother and had sent the black knight with the bird of prey wings on his helmet after me. Ive told you about him remember? On Thanedd Island as he reached out for me I cut him and left him to bleed! I had time to kill… But somehow I could not…
I was stupid! Oh what the heck maybe he stayed there and bled to death on Thanedd…Why are you looking at me?
Continue. Tell me how you rode after Hotsporn to gain your inheritance. In order to obtain what was yours.
You dont need to speak so reproachfully dont need to scoff. Yes I realize that it was stupid I see that now. Even back then… in Kaer Morhen and the Temple of Melitele I had been wiser – I knew that my past could not return that I was no longer the princess of Cintra but someone completely different; that I had no inheritance that it was lost and that I had to accept it. It had been explained to me wisely and calmly and I had accepted it. Likewise calmly. Then suddenly it began to return. The first time someone tried to impress me with the title of Baroness Casadei… I had never cared about such things before but I suddenly became furious stretching my nose up high and screaming that I would have an even higher title that I was of much nobler birth. And from then on I couldnt stop thinking about it. I could feel the anger growing in me. Do you understand Vysogota?
Yes.
And Hotsporns story was the last straw. I was almost boiling with rage… They had previously talked to me so much of predestination… And now someone else was enjoying this predestination thanks to an ordinary hoax. Someone had posed as me as Ciri of Cintra and could do anything could bathe in the luxury… No I could think of nothing else… Suddenly I realized that I never had enough to eat that I was freezing cold that I slept under the open sky that I had to wash my private parts in icy streams… I! I could have had a gold-plated tub! Water that smells of lavender and roses! Warmed towels! A clean bed! Do you understand Vysogota?
Yes.
All of the sudden I was ready to ride to the next province to the next fort to those black Nilfgaardians I feared and hated so much… I was willing to say Hey Nilfgaardian idiots Im Ciri I have not been taken by your stupid emperor for his wife they have planted some brazen impostor with your emperor and the idiot did not even notice the scam! I was so keen that I would have done it if an opportunity presented itself. Without hesitation. Do you understand Vysogota?
Yes.
Fortunately I calmed down.
To your good fortune he nodded seriously. Those imperial marriages have all the features of any state affair – a battle of political parties or factions. If you had revealed yourself some influential forces would have made quick calculations about you and you probably would have ended up with a dagger in your back or poisoned just to be safe.
I also understood that. And I noticed. I remembered that well. To reveal who I was meant death. I had the opportunity to convince them. But I did not anticipate.
For a time they were silent while they worked on the skins. The catch of the last few days had been unexpectedly plentiful; they had found many muskrats and nutria in the traps and snares as well as two otters and a beaver. They had a lot of work to do.
Did you catch up to Hotsporn? Vysogota finally asked.
Yes. Ciri wiped her forehead with her sleeve. And I caught up with him quickly because he was in no hurry. And he wasnt even surprised when he saw me!
Miss Falka! Hotsporn pulled his reins and his black mare turned and pranced. What a very pleasant surprise! Although I must admit that it is not quite as large as it is pleasant. I expected you Ill admit that I expected you. I could see that you were about to make a decision. A wise decision. I see the sparkle of intelligence in those beautiful and enchanting eyes.
Ciri rode closer so close that their stirrups almost touched. Then she cleared her throat leaned over and spat on the sand of the road. She had learned to spit in such a way – it was disgusting but also effective to cool the zeal of a would-be seducer.
I suppose said Hotsporn with a hint of smile that you wish to take advantage of the amnesty?
Then you suppose wrong.
To what then should I attribute the joy given to me at the sight of the ladys beautiful little face?
Do you need a reason? she hissed. At the station you said that you always welcome travelling companions.
True his smile was open but if I am wrong in regards to the amnesty then I do not know whether we have the same path. We are as you can see at a crossroads. A crossroads four directions the need to decide… the symbolism from the famous fairy tale. If you go east you will not return… If you go west you will not return… and north… hmm… To the north of this post lies the amnesty…
Stick your amnesty somewhere else.
As the lady orders. So where may I ask are you headed? Which direction of the symbolic crossroads? Master Alma Vera the artist of the needle has driven his mule to the west to the town of Fano. The eastern highway leads to the settlement of Jealousy though I would urgently advise against travelling that way…
The Yarra River said Ciri slowly which you spoke of in the station… it is the Nilfgaardian name for the Yaruga is not it?
The young lady is so knowledgeable – he leaned forward and looked into her eyes – but does not know that?
Cant you respond properly when you are politely asked a question?
I was just having a little fun—why are you so angry? Yes it is the same river. In Elvish and Nilfgaardian the Yarra in the north the Yaruga.
And the mouth of this river continued Ciri is in Cintra?
Yes my lady. Cintra.
How far is it from here Cintra? How many miles?
A lot. And it depends on whose mile you use. Nearly every other nation has their own measurement and it is easy to confuse them. That is why the travelling merchants measure such distances in days. To ride from here to Cintra would take twenty-five or thirty such days.
Where? Directly to the north?
It appears Miss Falka is very interested in this Cintra. Why?
I will ascend the throne there.
Okay okay Hotsporn raised his hands in a defensive gesture. I can see that its a delicate matter I wont ask any more questions. The easiest way to Cintra paradoxically is not directly to the north because roadless terrain and a marshy lake district will impede your progress. Instead you should travel to the city Forgeham and then ride northwest for Metinna the capital of the country with the same name. Then you cross the Mag Deira Plains and follow the trade route until you reach the city of Neunreuth. Take the north highway out of Neunreuth which runs along the valley of river Yelena. From there it is easy to find: follow the constant lines of troops and military transports that travel the road. That will lead you to the valley of Marnadal by Nasair and over the Marnadal Stairs the pass that leads north. And thats already Cintra.
Hmm… Ciri stared at the misty horizon blurred with lines of black hills. After Forgeham ride to the northwest… that means… how far?
You know what Miss? Hotsporn smiled gently. Im on my way to Forgeham and then onto Metinna and the trade route that extends between the hills. If the lady will ride with me she will not get lost. Towards amnesty but not to amnesty. Still it would be my pleasure to work and travel with such a beautiful young lady.
Ciri gave him the coldest look she had. Hotsporn returned a mischievous smile. So what do you think?
Lets go.
Bravo Miss Falka. A wise decision. As I said the lady is as smart as she is beautiful.
Stop calling me Miss Hotsporn. The way you say it makes it sound insulting somehow and I will not be insulted with impunity.
As the lady orders.
The beautiful dawn had not fulfilled the expectations it had set. The day that followed was gray and wet.
Damp fog dulled the bright colors of autumn foliage on the trees which leaned over the road. Thousands of browns reds and yellows could be seen.
The humid air smelled of bark and fungi.
They rode at a walk on a cushion of fallen leaves but Hotsporn often drove his black mare to a trot or gallop. Ciri watched enviously.
Does she have a name?
No Hotsporn smiled teeth gleaming. I treat mounts from the point of usefulness; they change very often so I pay them no loyalty. I consider it over the top to name horses if you are not keeping a breeding book. Dont you agree? The horse Goldhans the dog Bello and the cat Mohrle. Over the top!
Ciri did not like the looks he gave her or his eloquent smile and least of all the slightly mocking tone in which he asked or answered questions. So she used a simple approach – silent monosyllabic language that did not provoke him. If it worked. Sometimes it did not work. Especially when he talked about his amnesty. However when she once again – and quite sharply – expressed her displeasure Hotsporn surprisingly changed tactics: he suddenly proclaimed that the amnesty was unnecessary in their case because it didnt even apply to them. The amnesty was for criminals he said not the victims of crime.
Ciri laughed uproariously. You are a victim yourself Hotsporn!
Im quite serious he assured her. Im not trying to make you laugh but rather suggesting a way that you can save your skin if you are ever captured. Of course it wont work with Baron Casadei and the Varnhagens would show you no mercy either – in the best case you would be lynched on the spot quickly and painlessly if you were lucky. However if you are captured by the governor and stand before the strict but fair face of imperial justice… Well then I would suggest this defense tactic: you break down in tears and declare yourself the innocent victim of circumstances.
Who would believe that?
Everyone. Hotsporn leaned over in the saddle and looked into her eyes. Because it is the truth. Youre an innocent victim Falka. You are not yet sixteen years old so according to the laws of the Empire youre underage. You came into the Rats gang by chance. Its not your fault that one of the female bandits Mistle had an eye for you her unnatural tendencies are well known. You have been subjugated by Mistle sexually exploited and forced to…
Well there Im going to have to interrupt you yes Ciri was surprised by her calm voice. Finally we have it the truth about you Hotsporn. Ive experienced people like you before.
Really?
Like every cockerel – she was still speaking calmly – your crest swells at the thought of Mistle and me. Like every stupid little man the thought arises in your stupid head that you should try to cure me of this unnatural disease and lead me back onto the path of reality. But you know what is disgusting and unnatural in all this? Those very thoughts!
Hotsporn looked at her silently with a somewhat enigmatic smile on his thin lips.
My thoughts dear Falka he said after a while might not be decent might not be pretty might not be… pah they obviously arent innocent… But by the gods they are in accordance with nature. My nature. You insult me if you think my affection for you is based on some… perverse curiosity. Ha you insult yourself if you ignore or do not notice the fact that your seductive charm and the exceptional beauty of your assets force every man to his knees. That the magic of your glance…
Listen Hotsporn she interrupted him are you just counting down the moments until you can sleep with me?
What shrewdness. He spread his hands. I have no words.
Then Ill help you. She drove her horse forward a little and looked back at him over her shoulder. Because I have enough words to share. I am honored. Under other circumstances who knows… If it were anyone other than you ha! But you Hotsporn do not appeal to me at all. Nothing absolutely nothing about you attracts me. I would say quite the contrary: everything about you repels me. You must admit that under such circumstances sexual intercourse would be an act against nature.
Hotsporn drove his horse forward as well and continued to smile. The black mare began to prance down the road and gracefully threw up her lovely head. Ciri turned side to side in the saddle struggling with a strange sensation that had suddenly arisen in her somewhere deep inside in the lower abdomen. It rapidly and persistently pushed outward on the skin irritated by clothing. I told him the truth thought Ciri. I do not like him hell it is his horse that I like his black mare. Not him but the horse… What a fucking idiot! No no no! Even if I disregard Mistle it would be ridiculous and stupid for me to give in to him only because I am excited by the sight of a black horse prancing on the road.
Hotsporn approached and looked into her eyes with a curious smile. Then he jerked at the reins again forcing the mare to stamp and turn sideways prancing. He knows Ciri thought the old bastard knows what I feel.
Damn it. Im just curious!
Pine needles said Hotsporn gently while he rode up close and stretched out his hand have become hooked in your hair. Ill take them out if you allow. I should add that the gesture springs from my gallantry not a perverse desire.
She was not surprised to discover his touch felt pleasant to her. The decision was still very far away but for safetys sake she calculated the days since her last menstrual period. Yennefer had taught her – count in advance and with a cool head because later when things heat up the head takes on a strange reluctance for calculating along with an inclination to take consequences too lightly.
Hotsporn looked into her eyes and smiled as if he knew that the calculation had come out in his favor. If only he were not so old Ciri secretly sighed. He must be more than thirty.
Tourmalines. Hotsporns fingers gently touched her ear and the earring. Pretty but only tourmalines. I would give you emeralds to wear. Their precious and penetrating green would be more appropriate for your beauty and eye color.
Look she said slowly and looked at him boldly even if something were going to happen I would demand the emeralds in advance. Because surely horses arent the only thing you treat in terms of usefulness Hotsporn. The morning after an exciting night you would think it over the top for me to remind you of my name. The dog Bello the cat Mohrle and the girl – Marie!
Quite right he forced a smile. You manage to cool down even the most passionate desires Snow Queen.
I had a good teacher.
The fog had lifted a little but it was still cloudy. And sleepy. The sleepiness was brutally interrupted by shouts and the sound of hooves. Riders emerged from behind the oaks they had just passed.
Both acted so quickly and so in-step with one another that it appeared they had rehearsed it for weeks. They stopped turned the horses and instantly went into a furious gallop crouching to their horses manes and urging them on with cries and heel strikes. Screaming stomping and rattling could be heard over the buzz of the feathered arrows that flew above their heads.
Into the forest Hotsporn called to her. Turn off into the woods! Into the brush!
They veered off without slowing down. Ciri pressed herself flat almost down to her horses neck because the branches whipping at her threatened to pull her from the saddle. She saw a crossbow bolt strike and splinter the trunk of an alder tree as she rode past. Screaming she urged her horse to go faster expecting an arrow to pierce her back at any moment. Hotsporn riding tight beside her suddenly let out a strange groan.
They set off next to a deep ravine and rode down a hill at breakneck speed into a large undergrowth of thorn bushes. Suddenly Hotsporn slipped from the saddle and fell into the bushes. The black mare whinnied reared up flicked her tail and ran. Ciri did not hesitate. She jumped off and gave her horse a slap on the rump. It raced after the black mare as Ciri helped Hotsporn get up. The two humans fled deeper into the underbrush through a clump of alders and launched themselves into the ravine. They rolled down the slope and landed at the bottom of the ravine among high ferns. Moss and mushrooms softened their fall.
Hoofs echoed from the top of the slope – luckily their pursuers were riding through the forest chasing after the fleeing horses. No one seemed to notice that they had disappeared into the ferns.
Who are they? whispered Ciri. She wiggled her way out from under Hotsporn who had landed on her during the fall then started picking mushrooms out of her hair. The governors people? The Varnhagens?
Ordinary bandits… Hotsporn spat leaves. Ruffians…
Offer the amnesty to them. She crunched sand between their teeth. Promise them…
Be quiet. They might hear you.
Hooo! Hooo! Heeeeree! It sounded condescending. Go around from left! From the leeefttt!
Hotsporn?
Yes?
You have blood on your back.
I know he replied coldly as he tore a strip of cloth from the front of his shirt and turned his back to her. Stuff it under my shirt. By my left shoulder blade…
Where did it get you? I dont see a bolt…
It was a pellet crossbow… loaded with a piece of iron most likely capped with a blacksmiths nail. Dont touch it. Its too close to the spine…
Damn it. What should I do then?
Remain silent. They are coming back.
Hooves pounded and someone whistled shrilly. Someone yelled cried and issued an order to turn around. Ciri pricked up her ears.
Ride away she murmured. They have abandoned the pursuit. And they failed to capture the horses.
Thats good.
We wont be able to capture them either. Will you be able to walk?
I wont need to he smiled showing her a rather cheap-looking bracelet on his wrist. I bought this glittering thing alongside the horse. Its magical. The mare has carried it from childhood. If I rub it like now its as if I call her. As if she hears my voice. And she comes running here. It will take a while but she will come. With a bit of luck your mare will come with her.
And without a bit of luck? You ride off alone?
Falka he said in a grave tone. I would not be able to ride off alone I need your help. You will need to keep me in the saddle. Im starting to lose feeling in my toes. I might lose consciousness. Listen up: this gulch leads to a valley with a stream. Ride upstream to the north. Bring me to a place called Tegamo. Well need to find someone there who can pull the iron out of my back because without that I will die or become paralyzed.
Is that the nearest town?
No. The nearest is Jealousy about twenty miles downstream along the valley in the opposite direction. But you cannot ride there.
Why?
You absolutely cannot ride there he repeated grimacing because its not about me but about you. Jealousy means death for you.
I dont understand.
You dont need to. Trust me.
You told Giselher…
Forget Giselher. If you want to live forget them all.
Why?
Stay with me. I keep my promises Snow Queen. Im going to outfit you with emeralds… cover you with them…
Indeed a great time for jokes.
It is always time for jokes.
Hotsporn suddenly embraced her pressed her shoulder to the ground and began to unbutton her blouse. Without ceremony but without haste.
Ciri pushed away his hand. Indeed she growled. A great time for that too!
But any time is good. Especially for me now. I told you its the backbone. Tomorrows problems can fix themselves… What are you doing? Oh damn…
This time she had pushed him away strongly. Too strongly. Hotsporn turned pale bit his lips moaned in pain.
Im sorry. But if someone is injured they must lie still.
The proximity of your body lets me forget the pain.
Stop it damn it!
Falka… have pity on a suffering person.
You will suffer if you do not take your hands away. Immediately!
Quiet… the bandits might hear us… Your skin is like satin… stop fighting it for heavens sake.
Oh what the hell Ciri thought. Why do I have to attach importance to it? Im curious. Im allowed to be curious. My feelings have nothing to do with it. I will treat him in terms of usefulness and nothing else. And forget about him without fuss.
She gave herself to his touch and the pleasant sensation that it brought with it. She turned her head but then thought it would appear like excessive modesty and false shame – she would not be thought of as a seduced innocent. She looked him straight in the eyes but then stopped as it appeared like excessive daring and challenging – another impression she did not want to give. So she simply closed her eyes threw her arms around his neck and helped him with the buttons because he was having trouble and wasting time.
The contact of fingers was followed by the contact of lips. She was on the verge of forgetting the whole world when Hotsporn suddenly stopped moving. For a while she lay patiently reminding herself that he was wounded and the wound was probably bothering him. But he took too long. His saliva began to dry on her nipples.
Hey Hotsporn? Did you fall asleep?
Something was running down her chest and side. She touched it with her fingers. Blood.
Hotsporn! she pushed him away. Hotsporn are you dead?
A silly question she thought. It is obvious. It is obvious that he is dead.
He died with his head on my breast. Ciri turned her head to the side. The red embers in the fireplace seemed to reflect on her disfigured cheek. Or perhaps she was blushing. Vysogota was not sure.
The only thing I felt back then she added her face still turned away was disappointment. Does that shock you?
No. Not anymore.
I understand. Im trying to tell everything without glossing over anything without twisting anything and without hiding anything. Although I sometimes feel like it especially the latter. She sniffed and wiped her eye with her thumb.
I covered him with branches and stones. Somehow Im not sure. It was dark and I had to spend the night there. The bandits were still in the area searching. When I heard their cries I was sure that they were no ordinary bandits. But I didnt know who they were chasing – me or him. So I had to sit still. All through the night. Until dawn. Beside the body. Brrr.
At dawn she continued after a while no signs of the bandits remained and I could get on the road. I already had a mount. The magic bracelet which I had taken from Hotsporn actually worked. The black mare returned. Now she belonged to me. That was my gift. There is such a custom on the Skellig Islands you know? A girls first lover gives her an expensive gift. What did it matter that mine had died before he could be my lover?
The mare stamped her front feet on the ground whinnied and turned to one side as if she wanted to be admired. Ciri could not suppress a sigh of admiration when she saw her neck straight and slim but very muscular the small well-shaped forehead the high withers and the admirably well-proportioned physique.
Ciri approached the mare cautiously and showed her the bracelet on her wrist. The mare snorted and pricked her ears up but allowed Ciri to take the bridle and stroke her velvety nose.
Kelpie said Ciri. Youre as black and smart as a Kelpie from the sea. You are magical like a Kelpie. So you shall be called Kelpie. And I couldnt care less whether it is over the top or not.
The mare snorted pricked her ears up and flicked her silky tail which reached to her ankles. Ciri who was used to riding in a high saddle shortened the stirrup straps and stroked the unusually shallow wooden-framed saddle with no saddle horn. She put a boot in the stirrup and grasped the horse by the mane. Calm down Kelpie.
Contrary to appearances the saddle was quite comfortable. And for obvious reasons much lighter than the usual cavalry saddles.
Now said Ciri as she patted the mares warm neck well see if youre fiery as well. Whether youre a real thoroughbred or just a mix-breed. What do you think of a gallop of twenty miles Kelpie?
If someone managed to sneak through the night and find the deeply hidden hut with a moss-thatched roof amidst the swamps and if they peeked through the cracks in the shutters they would have seen a gray-bearded old man listening to the story of a teenage girl with green eyes and ash-blonde hair.
They would have seen that the remains of the embers in the hearth were bright and lively as if in anticipation of what was to be told.
But that was not possible. No one could see that. The cabin of old Vysogota was well-hidden in the reeds of the marsh. In an eternally-shrouded fog desert that no one dared enter.
The valley with the stream was even and well-suited for riding so Kelpie ran like a whirlwind. Of course I did not ride upstream but downstream. I had remembered the curious name: Jealousy. I recalled what Hotsporn said to Giselher in the station. I knew why he had warned me about the town. An ambush was waited for the Rats in Jealousy. As soon as Giselher had dismissed the offer of amnesty and work for the guild Hotsporn had specifically reminded him of the bounty hunter who had taken up quarters in the town. He knew that the Rats would swallow the bait. That they would ride to the town and to calamity. I had to get to the vicinity of Jealousy intercept them and warn them. Convince them to turn around. Save them all. Or at least Mistle.
I can imagine muttered Vysogota that you did not succeed.
At the time she said flatly I thought a couple of divisions armed to the teeth waited in Jealousy. I didnt even dream that the ambush might be a single man…
She paused gazing into the darkness.
I had no idea what kind of man that was.
Birka was once a prosperous village. It had a charming and extremely picturesque location – its yellow straw and red-tiled rooftops crowded close together in the middle of a valley with steep wooded slopes which changed their color depending on the season. Especially in autumn the sight of Birka pleased the aesthetic eye or sensitive heart.
So it was up to the time when the settlement changed its name. It happened like this:
A young elven farmer from the nearby colony of elves fell madly in love with the daughter of the miller of Birka. The easygoing millers daughter laughed at the advances of the elf but spread her charms with neighbors acquaintances and even a relative. So the people began to mock the Elf and his blind love. The elf broke – quite atypical for an elf – and unleashed his anger and vengeance in a horrible way. One night when there was a favorably strong wind he lit a fire and burned Birka to the ground.
Burned out and ruined the villagers lost their courage. Some wandered the world; others fell into sloth and booze. The money collected for the reconstruction was embezzled and drank away. The town now offered an image of poverty and misery: it was a collection of ugly and haphazardly cobbled together shacks under the bare and blackened valley slope. Before the fire Birka had an oval shape with a small square in the middle. Now the few reasonably well-reconstructed homes stores and distilleries formed something like a long street. At the end of the street they worked together to build the inn The Chimeras Head whose landlady was a widow of the blaze.
And for seven years no one had used the name of Birka. Instead they called it Flame or Zeal or simply Jealousy.
The Rats rode along the street of Jealousy. It was a cold overcast gloomy morning.
The people rushed into their houses and hid themselves in shacks and mud huts. Everyone who had shutters slammed them shut with a bang. Everyone who had a door locked and barricaded it. Everyone who still had liquor drank to give them courage. The Rats were riding at a walk ostentatiously slow stirrup-to-stirrup. Their faces were painted with indifference and contempt but their squinting eyes vigilantly watched every window porch and corner.
A single crossbow bolt! Giselher warned loudly so that all could hear him. A single twang of a tendon and there will be a massacre!
And once again your town will meet flames! added Spark in a full high soprano. There will be nothing left but earth and water!
Certainly some of the people had crossbows but no one was willing to test whether the Rats were talking in the wind or not.
The Rats dismounted. They crossed the fifty or sixty steps that separated them from The Chimeras Head on foot side-by-side with a rhythmic ringing and jingling of spurs jewelry and clothing ornaments.
Three locals who had been soothing their hangovers with beer on the porch of the inn disappeared at the sight of them.
If hes in there muttered Kayleigh. We shouldnt have waited. We shouldnt have rested but should have broken in at night and…
Youre stupid Spark bared her little teeth. If we want the bards to sing songs about it we cant do it at night and in the dark. The people must see it! The morning is best because everyone is still sober isnt that right Giselher?
Giselher did not answer. He picked up a rock took aim and sent it crashing against the door. Come out Bonhart!
Come out Bonhart! The Rats repeated in chorus. Come out Bonhart!
Steps echoed from inside. Slow and heavy. Mistle felt a chill run down her spine.
Bonhart appeared at the door.
The Rats instinctively took a step back dug the high heels of their boots into the ground and moved their hands to their hilts. The bounty hunter had his sword tucked under his arm so he had his hands free – in one he was holding a peeled egg in the other a crust of bread.
He moved to the railing slowly looking down on them from above. He stood on the porch and he was huge. Gigantic though thin as a ghoul.
He stared at them his watery eyes wandering over each of them one by one. He bit a piece of the egg followed by a piece of the bread.
And where is Falka? he said vaguely. A crumb of yolk fell out of his mouth.
Run Kelpie! Run Beautiful! Run as fast as you can!
The black mare whinnied loudly and bent her head forward at a breakneck gallop. Even though gravel went flying out from under them her hooves barely seemed to touch the ground.
Bonhart stretched lazily his leather jerkin creaking then slowly tightened his moose-leather gloves and adjusted them carefully. Well what is it? he grimaced. You want to kill me yes? Why?
Yes for Toadstool said Kayleigh.
And for fun added Spark.
And so we have peace put in Reef.
Aah said Bonhart slowly. And so it goes! And if I promise to give you peace will you let me go on my way?
No you gray dog we will not Mistle smiled charmingly. We know you. We know that you dont give anything to anyone and that you will creep after us and wait for an opportunity to stick a knife in our backs. Come out!
Gently gently. Bonhart smiled pulling his mouth as wide as the menacing gray moustache above it. There is always time to dance dont get excited. First Ill make you an offer Rats. Ill leave the choice to you and then you can do whatever you want.
What are you mumbling there old geezer? Kayleigh cried and tensed slightly. Speak more clearly!
Bonhart nodded and scratched his leg. There is a bounty on you Rats. A considerable bounty. And yes I must make a living.
Spark hissed like a wildcat and glared at him with wildcat eyes.
Bonhart folded his arms across his chest and moved the sword into his armpit. A considerable bounty he repeated if you are dead and a little more if you are alive. Frankly it is all the same to me. I have nothing against you personally. Just yesterday I was thinking that I would like to kill you for fun and entertainment but you came here yourselves and saved me trouble and that touches my heart. So I leave you the choice. How do you prefer I take you – alive or dead?
Kayleigh clenched his jaw and Mistle leaned forward ready to pounce.
Giselher grabbed her by the shoulder. He wants to make us angry he whispered. Let the bastard talk.
Bonhart snorted. Well? he repeated. Alive or dead? I suggest the former. Because as you know: it is much much less painful.
On cue the Rats drew their weapons. Giselher swung his blade and froze in fencing posture. Mistle spat. Come here you skeleton she said with apparent calm. Come on you bastard. Well stab you like an old mutt.
Thus you have chosen death. Bonhart stared at something far away over the rooftops then slowly drew his sword and threw away the scabbard. He came down from the porch without haste his spurs jingling.
The Rats quickly spread across the width of the road. Kayleigh went furthest to the left almost to the wall of a distillery. Next to him was Spark her thin lips curled into her usual terrible smile. Mistle Asse and Reef went to the right. Giselher remained in the center and scrutinized the bounty hunter with squinted eyes.
Very well Rats. Bonhart looked around the street looked up to the sky raised his sword and spit on the edge. If were going to dance lets dance. Play music!
They jumped at one another like wolves lightning-fast silently and without warning. Blades whizzed through the air and the small street echoed with the mournful clang of steel. At first all you could hear was swords clashing sighs moans and heavy breathing.
And then suddenly and unexpectedly the Rats began to scream. And die.
Reef was the first thrown out of the fray he bounced back against a wall and his blood splattered the dirty white mortar. Then Asse broke off from the group with tottering steps doubled over and fell on his side writhing and clutching his knee.
Bonhart spun and leapt like a top surrounded by the flashing and whistling of blades. The Rats backed away from him sprang forward struck again and backed away again angry stubborn merciless. And unsuccessful. Bonhart parried struck parried struck attacked attacked relentlessly leaving no breathing space setting the tempo. The Rats could only fall back. And die.
Spark taken in the neck fell in the mud and curled up like a kitten blood spurting from her aorta to her calves and knees. The bounty hunter beat back Mistles and Giselhers wide sweeping attacks then he spun around and with a lightning-quick strike from his sword tip slit Kayleigh open – from collarbone to hip. Kayleigh dropped his sword but did not notice – he just crouched and grabbed his chest and abdomen with both hands blood gushing from under his palms. Bonhart dodged Giselhers blow with another spin parried Mistles attack and dealt another blow to Kayleigh which turned one side of his head into scarlet pulp. The light-haired rat fell apart and left a puddle of blood mixing with the dirt road.
Mistle and Giselher hesitated for a moment. Instead of fleeing they shouted with one voice wildly and furiously and pounced on Bonhart.
And they died.
Ciri dashed into the village and galloped down the street. Splashes of mud flew from the hooves of the black mare.
Bonhart smashed his heel against Giselher who was on the wall. The leader of the Rats showed no signs of life. No more blood flowed from his shattered skull.
Mistle who was on her knees looking for her sword ran both hands through mud and mire without realizing that she was kneeling in a rapidly growing red puddle. Bonhart slowly walked toward her.
Noooo!
The bounty hunter raised his head.
Ciri launched herself from the running horse stumbled and fell to one knee.
Bonhart smiled. A Rat he said. The seventh Rat. Glad youre here. You will complete my collection.
Mistle found her sword but was not able to lift it. She gasped and threw herself at Bonharts feet trembling fingers clutching his boots. She opened her mouth to scream but instead of a cry a brilliant crimson torrent poured from her mouth. Bonhart stepped vigorously on her and pushed her into the dirt. But Mistle who was holding her ripped open stomach got back up.
Noooo! yelled Ciri. Miiistle!
The bounty hunter heeded her cry without even turning his head. He swung wide and struck with a powerful sweeping blow as with a scythe so that Mistle was pulled up from the ground and thrown against the wall like a soft cloth doll like a red-smeared rag.
The cry in Ciris throat died. Her hands trembled as she reached for her sword.
Murderer she said surprised at the strangeness of her voice. At the strangeness of her mouth which was suddenly incredibly dry. Murderer! Bastard!
Bonhart watched her curiously head tilted slightly to the side. Do you want to die? he asked.
Ciri approached him and traced a semicircle around him. The sword in his raised and outstretched hands stirred struck gravel and feinted.
The bounty hunter laughed out loud. Death he repeated. The little Rat wants to die!
He turned slowly on the spot not falling for the trap of the semicircle. But it didnt matter to Ciri. She seethed with anger and hatred trembling with lust for murder. She wanted to throw herself at this terrible old man; wanted to feel the blade pierce his body. Wanted to see his blood as it oozed from slashed arteries in the rhythm of the heartbeat.
Well Rat. Bonhart lifted the sword and spit on the edge. Before you croak show me what youve got! Play music!
Six days later Nycklar the son of the coffin maker told the story I really dont know how it was that they didnt kill each other at that first meeting. They certainly wanted to kill you could tell. She he both of them. They pounced on each other and crossed swords. They might have exchanged two or three blows every instant. There was nobody who could count them by eye nor ear. They struck so fast my lord that it was indistinguishable. And they danced and jumped around each other like two weasels!
Stefan Skellen called The Owl listened intently as he played with his riding whip.
They jumped away from each other continued the lad and no one had a scratch. The Rat you could tell was mad as the devil and hissed like a cat thats had its mouse taken away. But Mr. Bonhart was very quiet.
Falka Bonhart grinned baring his teeth like a real ghoul. You really understand how to dance and handle a sword! Youve made me curious girl. Who are you? Tell me before you die.
Ciri breathed heavily. She recognized the feeling of terror. She understood what she had to do.
Tell me who you are and Ill spare your life.
She gripped her sword handle tighter. She had to penetrate his display and take him before he covered himself. She could not let him retaliate against her blows; she could not parry his blows without once more risking the pain and paralysis that had seized her elbow and forearm. She could not waste energy trying to dodge his blows which only missed by a hairs breadth. Bypass his coverage she thought. Immediately. In this meeting. Or die.
You will die Rat he said and thrust his sword forward towards her. Are you not afraid? Thats because you do not know what death looks like.
Kaer Morhen she thought as she jumped. Lambert. The comb. Salto.
She took three steps and performed a half-pirouette. When he attacked ignoring the ruse she did a back flip letting herself fall into a squatting position and pounced on him dodged under his blade and twisted her wrist to deliver a powerful blow supported by a strong rotation of the hip. Euphoria suddenly seized her; already she could almost feel the blade biting into his body.
Instead there was a hard piercing clang of metal on metal. And a sudden flash in her eyes shock and pain. She felt as if she had fallen. Hes parried back and beaten me she thought. Im dying she thought.
Bonhart kicked her in the stomach. With a second kick accurately targeted at her hurt elbow he knocked the sword away from her hand. Ciri clutched her head feeling a dull pain but there was no wound under her fingers no blood. Ive taken a blow from his fist she thought in horror. Only from his fist. Or from the sword hilt. He has not killed me. I was thrashed like a brat.
She opened her eyes.
The bounty hunter stood over her. Thin as a skeleton he towered over her like a sick deciduous tree. He stank of sweat and blood.
He grabbed her by the hair pulled her and forced her to stand up. Immediately he dragged her away screaming to the wall Mistle was lying by.
So you do not fear death? he growled and pushed her head down. Then look at that little Rat. This is death. This is how one dies. Look theres guts. This is blood. And thats shit which she used to have inside of her.
Ciri squirmed and writhed but his hand held her in place and before long her only movements were twitching and dry retching. Mistle was still alive but her eyes were dull and glassy like a fish. Her hand – like a hawks talon – opened and closed buried in mud and feces. Ciri smelled the sharp penetrating odor of urine.
Bonhart laughed out loud. This little Rat is dying. In her own piss!
He let go of her hair. Ciri slumped down to her hands and feet shaking with sobs. Mistle was right beside her. Mistles hand the slender delicate soft clever hands of Mistle…
…did not move.
He did not kill me. He tied me to the hitching posts by both hands.
Vysogota sat there motionless. He had been sitting similarly for a while now. He even held his breath. Ciri went on with her story but her voice was increasingly dull increasingly unnatural and increasingly uncomfortable.
He told those who gathered that they should bring him a bag of salt and a small barrel of vinegar. And a saw. I did not know… I couldnt understand what he was doing. I was tied up… at the hitching posts… He called some servants and ordered them to hold me by the hair… and eyelids. He showed them how… So that I could neither turn my head away nor close my eyes. So I had to watch what he was doing. He must make sure that the goods dont go bad he said. That they do not decompose…
Ciris voice cracked her words stuck in her dry throat. Vysogota who knew at once what he was about to hear felt the bile rising in his throat like a flood.
He cut their heads off Ciri said flatly. With a saw. Giselher Kayleigh Asse Reef Spark… and Mistle. He cut off their heads… one by one. Before my eyes.
If someone managed to sneak into the secret heart of the swamp and find the hut with the moss-thatched roof if they had peeked through the cracks in the shutters they would have seen in the dimly-lit interior a gray-bearded old man in a sheepskin coat and a girl with ash-blonde hair whose face was disfigured by a scar on her cheek. They would have seen how the girl was shaking from fits of crying as she sobbed in the arms of the old man who tried to reassure her by clumsily stroking her hair and patting her quivering shoulders.
But that was not possible. No one could see that. The hut was well-hidden in the reeds of the marsh. In an eternally-shrouded fog desert that no one dared enter.
Im often asked how it came to be that I decided to write down my memories. Many people are curious about the moment in which my memoirs had their origin – namely the facts and circumstances regarding the event that is also the beginning of the transcript and the catalyst that accompanied it. In the past I have given various false explanations and have lied many times but I now want the truth to be told because today my hair is white and worn thin and I know that the truth is a precious grain whereas the lie is useless chaff.
But the truth is that the incident that was the catalyst for those first notes from which my work later began was a coincidence – namely that a pencil and paper were among the things my companions and I had stolen from the camp of the troops of Lyria. And so it came to pass…
Dandelion
Half a Century of Poetry
CHAPTER THREE
It happened on the fifth day of September after the new moon on exactly the thirtieth day of our expedition – beginning with our departure from Brokilon and six days after the Battle on the Bridge.
Now my future readers I will go back in time a little and describe the events that took place immediately after the glorious and momentous Battle on the Bridge. First however I want to bring a number of readers into the picture those that have no knowledge of the Battle of the Bridge – whether it be due to other interests or as a result of general ignorance. So: That battle took place on the last day of August during the Great War. It was fought in Angren on the bridge connecting the two shores of the river Yaruga near a fortress called the Red Binduga. The forces in that armed conflict were: the Army of Nilfgaard The Army Corps of Lyria – led by Queen Meve and us our wonderful company – myself the writer of these lines the witcher Geralt the vampire Emiel Regis Rohellec Terzieff-Godefroy the archer Maria Barring called Milva and Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach a Nilfgaardian who tended to stress with an obstinacy that was worthy of a better cause that he was not a Nilfgaardian.
You reader might be unclear on how the Queen came to be alive and in Angren as you may have heard that she disappeared and perished along with her army when the Nilfgaardians thrust into Lyria Rivia and Aedirn in July which ended with the complete subjugation of those countries and their occupation by Imperial troops. Meve was not however killed in battle as was supposed nor even taken into Nilfgaardian captivity. After they had regrouped the brave Meve and a large portion of the survivors of the Lyrian Army recruited everyone they could including mercenaries and ordinary bandits and launched a guerrilla war against Nilfgaard. And wild Angren suited such a guerrilla war ideally – whether they needed a thicket to spring an ambush from or a thicket to hide in Angren accommodated them. Because in Angren there are thickets everywhere. In fact there is nothing in that area worth mentioning except the thickets.
Meves Crowd – which the army of the White Queen became known as – grew rapidly in strength and developed such bravado that they fearlessly crossed to the left bank of the Yaruga deep behind enemy lines in order to camp and harass the enemy to their hearts desire.
Here we return to our subject namely the Battle on the Bridge. The tactical situation looked like this: Queen Meves forces after having camped on the left bank of the Yaruga for some time wanted to flee to the right bank. However they met a group of Nilfgaardians on the bridge who after having camped on the right bank of the Yaruga for some time wanted to flee to the left bank. We entered the above-mentioned situation from a central position that is starting from the middle of the river Yaruga and surrounded by armed men on both sides right and left. Since we could thus escape to nowhere we became heroes covered with immortal fame. The battle was won by the Lyrians because they achieved what they intended namely to escape to the right bank. The Nilfgaardians who had fled in an unknown direction had lost the battle. I realize that this all sounds pretty confusing and I promise to consult a military theorist before publishing. For now I am relying on the authority of Cahir aep Ceallach the only soldier in our company – and Cahir has confirmed that from the perspective of most military doctrines winning a battle through the rapid escape of the battlefield is allowed.
Without a doubt our companys part in the battle was glorious. However it had some negative effects. Milva who was pregnant suffered a tragic accident. Luck was kind enough to hold for the rest of us and no one else suffered serious harm. However it soon wore off because we received no rewards only thanks. The exception was the witcher Geralt. Because contrary to his often-proclaimed – and as you can see hypocritical – indifferent attitude and his often-declared neutrality the witcher Geralt displayed equally large and overly-spectacular zeal on the battlefield. In other words: he fought so remarkably well that it was impossible not to notice. And indeed it did not go unnoticed – Meve the Queen of Lyria personally knighted him. However this accolade soon revealed more inconveniences than advantages.
You must know dear reader that the witcher Geralt was always a modest uncomplicated balanced and controlled man who kept his feelings to himself and was as straightforward as a halberd shaft. However the unexpected promotion and apparent favor of Queen Meve changed him – had I not known him better I would have said that the glory had gone to his head. Rather than quickly and anonymously vanishing from the scene Geralt rode around in the royal camp delighting in the honor enjoying the patronage and basking in the glory.
But fame and attention were the last things we needed. To those who have forgotten I call to mind that the afore-mentioned witcher Geralt now knighted was wanted in connection to the uprising on Thanedd the island of magicians by the intelligence services of all four kingdoms. To me a person who has never been guilty of anything they tried to attach the charge of espionage. In addition was Milva who as it turned out had collaborated with the Dryads and the Scioatael and had been involved in the infamous massacres of people on the edges of Brokilon Forest. On top of that was Cahir aep Ceallach the Nilfgaardian who was after all a citizen of a hostile country and whose presence on the wrong side of the front would not be easy to explicate and justify. As it turned out the only member of our company whose career was not tainted with political or criminal affairs was a vampire. Therefore it was sufficient that only one of us needed to be exposed and identified in order to bring sharpened aspen stakes on all of us. Every day we spent in the shadow of Lyrian flags – which at first were spent comfortably well fed and safe by the way – increased the risk.
When I strongly reminded Geralt of this his face darkened a little but he presented his motives to me of which he had two. First Milva still needed nursing and care after her unfortunate accident and there were field medics with the army. Second Queen Meves army was travelling east towards Caed Dhu. Before our company had been forced to change direction and had been caught in the battle described above we had also been travelling east towards Caed Dhu – because we were hoping the Druids who live there could give us information that would be useful in the search for Ciri. Rampant horsemen and marauding mercenaries in Angren had been the reason we were forced to stray from the straight path to the Druids. Now under the protection of the friendly Lyrian army and with the favor and affection of Queen Meve we could openly travel the way to Caed Dhu easily and safely.
I warned the witcher that the Queens apparent favor was fickle and deceptive. The witcher would not listen. However it was soon shown who was right. When news arrived from the east that a Nilfgaardian punitive expedition was marching to Angren from Klamat pass the Lyrian army turned north without hesitation towards Mahakam. As one can easily imagine Geralt did not like this change of direction – he wanted to reach the Druids as quickly as possible not Mahakam! Naive as a child he rushed to Queen Meve to receive a discharge from the army and the royal blessing for his private affairs. And at that moment the royal grace and favor came to an end and the respect and admiration for the heroes of the Battle on the Bridge scattered like smoke. The knight Geralt of Riva was reminded in a cold but firm tone of his duties to the Crown. The still-ailing Milva the vampire Regis and the author of these lines were advised to join the column of refugees and civilians who followed the camp. Cahir aep Ceallach a tall young man who looked nothing like a civilian had a blue and white sash tied to him and was assigned to the so-called Free Company – a cavalry unit comprised of all sorts of scum the Lyrian Corps had picked up along the way. And so we were separated and it looked like our expedition had come to a definite and irrevocable conclusion.
As you can imagine dear reader that was by no means the end. Yes it was not even the beginning! As soon as Milva learned of the development of things she immediately declared herself to be healthy and fit for travel – and issued the watchword to escape at the first opportunity. Cahir threw the royal colors in the bushes and disappeared from the Free Company and advised Geralt to do the same from the exquisite luxury tents of the knighthood.
I will not indulge details about myself – my modesty does not allow me to highlight my own achievements in the companys escape – though they were not small. I will only state the facts: on the night between September fifth and sixth our company quietly left the Corps of Queen Meve. Before we said farewell to the Lyrian army we did not miss the opportunity to restock our provisions where we were caught without permission by the quartermaster. Milva used the word robbery but I think it is too strong. After all we deserved a bonus for our participation in the memorable Battle for the Bridge. And if not a reward at least satisfaction and compensation for the losses suffered. Apart from Milvas tragic accident and the numerous injuries and wounds Geralt and Cahir had sustained all of our horses had been killed or maimed in the battle – excepting my trusty Pegasus and the wayward Roach the mare of the witcher. So as recompense we took three thoroughbred horses and a pack horse. We also provided ourselves with as much equipment as we could fit into our hands – in fairness I should add that we threw half of it away later. As Milva noted before we started if you steal in the dark you dont know what you are getting. The most fiscally useful things came from the cache of the vampire who sees better in darkness than in daylight. Regis also reduced the combat power of the Lyrian army by one fat mouse-gray mule which he so ably led from the camp that not once did the animal neigh or stamp. Therefore the stories of how animals sense vampires and react to their smell with panic must be dismissed as a myth – at least when it comes to certain animals and certain vampires. I should add that we still have this mouse-gray mule today. Later after the pack horse was frightened by wolves and abandoned us in the forests of Riverdell the mule bore all of our belongings – or rather what was left of them. The mule is called Draakula. It received the name from Regis just after he had stolen it and retains it to this day. The name obviously amused Regis and must surely have had some humorous meaning in the culture and language of vampires but when we wanted him to explain it to us he claimed that it was an untranslatable play on words.
So our company was on the road again and the already lengthy list of people who had something against us had become even longer. Geralt of Rivia the knight without fear and without reproach left the ranks of knighthood before his accolade was notarized and before the heraldic coat of arms he had devised was patented. Cahir aep Ceallach – who had already fought with and deserted armies on both sides of the Great War between the Northern Kingdoms and Nilfgaard – had earned himself death sentences in absentia from both. The rest of us were in no better positions – the noose is the noose and it is ultimately not a big difference the only difference is for what – for defilement of chivalry desertion or that you have given a military-mule the name of Draakula.
It should not surprise you then reader that we displayed truly titanic efforts to increase and maximize the distance between us and the Corps of Queen Meve.
With the borrowed horses we rode south to Yaruga and crossed over to the left bank. Certainly not only to put the river between us and the Queen with her guerrillas but because the solitude of Riverdell was far less dangerous than the war-captured Angren. And so we logically travelled to the Druids of Caed Dhu on the left bank instead of on the right. Paradoxically – because the left bank of the Yaruga already belonged to the enemy The Empire of Nilfgaard. The father of the concept to travel the left bank was the witcher Geralt who after resigning from the brotherhood of knightly braggarts had recovered a considerable extent of his rational logical thinking and his usual caution. The future showed that the witchers plan was momentous and strongly influenced the fate of the whole expedition. More about that later.
When we arrived at the Yaruga Nilfgaardians were already swarming over the reconstructed bridge at Red Binduga. They were marching to continue their offensive in Angren – and then on to Temeria Mahakam and the devil knows where or what else the Nilfgaardian General Staff had planned. There could be no question of crossing the river during the march we had to keep hidden and wait until the troops were gone. Two whole days we sat in a willow thicket by the river cultivating rheumatism and feeding the mosquitoes. To add to the unhappiness the weather took a turn for the worse. It was drizzling there was a disgusting wind and it was so cold that our teeth chattered. I cannot remember such a cold September even though I have many of those months in my memory. It was then dear reader that I rummaged through the equipment that we had borrowed from the Lyrian camp found a pencil and paper and began – to kill time and forget the inconveniences – to write down and eternalize some of our adventures.
The depressing rainy weather and the forced idleness spoiled the mood and provoked dark thoughts to arise in us. Especially in the witcher. Geralt had earlier acquired the habit of calculating the days he had been separated from Ciri – and every day that he was not travelling as he said separated them more and more. Well in the wet willows in the cold and the rain the witcher grew darker and more grim by the hour. I also noticed that he was limping badly and if he believed that no one can see or hear him he cursed and hissed in pain. You must know dear reader that Geralts bone had been shattered during the conference of mages on Thanedd. The fractures had mended and healed thanks to the magical efforts of the Dryads of Brokilon Forest but clearly still presented difficulties. So the witcher suffered as they say both physical and emotional pain and he was so furious that he preferred to be ignored.
And again dreams began to haunt him. On the ninth of September – the morning because he had stood guard all night and had not slept until then – he terrorized us all for he jumped up with a cry and drew the sword. He looked like he was about to go berserk but luckily he caught himself immediately.
He walked away and came back soon after with a surly face proposing no more and no less than to immediately dissolve the company and to go on alone himself because somewhere a terrible event had happened and time was short. He said it would be dangerous and he would not force anyone to take responsibility for anyone else. He spoke and grumbled so bleakly and without conviction that no one wanted to discuss it with him.
The usually eloquent vampire dismissed him with a shrug Milva spat and Cahir dryly recalled that he had already attempted to travel alone but in regards to the risk said that he who wears the sword should not complain about the belt. And then they all fell silent and focused their attention on the significant writer of these lines no doubt expecting that I would take the opportunity to return home. I need not add that they were very mistaken.
The event however led us to make an end to our miasma and provided the impetus for a bold act – crossing the Yaruga. I confess that I worried about the operation – the plan called for namely crossing the river at night while swimming or as Milva and Cahir put it being towed by the horses cocks. Even if they were speaking metaphorically – and I suspect that they were – I could not imagine myself on such a crossing on my gelding Pegasus on whose cock I would have to rely. Swimming generally speaking was not and is not my particular strength. If Mother Nature had intended that I swim she would have over the course of evolution equipped me with webbed fingers and toes. The same thing was true of Pegasus.
My fears proved unfounded – at least when it came to being towed by a horses cock. We crossed over a different way. Who knows perhaps it was even more insane. In a truly bold way – on the reconstructed bridge at Red Binduga right under the eyes of Nilfgaardian guards and patrols. It turns out that the operation only appeared to be insane insolence and a deadly game of chance when in fact everything went like clockwork. Following the infantry lines across the bridge was a caravan of transport wagons cattle herds and all sorts of people including people in plain clothes with whom our company blended right in unnoticed. And so on the tenth day of September we rode across to the left bank of the Yaruga. Only once were we questioned by a sentry who Cahir with a domineering frown bluffed with the threat of some imperial service underscoring his words with the traditional military and always effective salutation of son-of-a-bitch. Before anyone arrived to investigate us we were already on the left bank of the Yaruga deep in the forests of Riverdell – where there was only one highway leading south. To us neither the direction of the highway nor the number of Nilfgaardians travelling on it was convenient.
At the first camp in the woods of Riverdell I also had a strange dream – unlike Geralt I dreamed not of Ciri but of the sorceress Yennefer. The dream was strange worrisome – Yennefer was dressed as usual in black and white and flew through the air over a dark small mountain castle while other sorceresses underneath her shook their fists at her and shouted insults. Yennefer waved the long sleeves of her dress and flew away like a black albatross out into a boundless sea opposite the rising sun. From that moment on the dream became a nightmare. Upon awakening the details had vanished from my memory. They remained only as unclear images with little meaning but those images were monstrous – torture screams pain fear death… In a word: horror.
I kept my dream from Geralt. I did not say a word. As it later turned out I was right.
Yennefer she was called! Yennefer of Vengerberg. A powerful and famous sorceress! May I fall down dead on the spot if I lie!
Triss Merigold started and turned around trying to see through the crowd and the blue smoke that filled the main hall of the tavern. Finally she got up from the table leaving behind with some regret the fillet of sole with anchovy paste a local specialty and true delicacy. She wasnt visiting the taverns and inns Bremervoord to eat delicacies but to gather information. She also had to pay attention to her schedule.
The circle of people she had to push her way through was already densely crowded – in Bremervoord people loved stories and took advantage of every opportunity to hear a new one. And the many sailors who came here never disappointed – they always had a fresh repertoire of anecdotes and yarns. Of course they were fictitious for the most part but that didnt matter. A story is a story. It has its own rules.
The woman who was telling the story – and had mentioned Yennefer – was a fisherwoman from the Skellig Islands. She was stocky and broad-shouldered wore her hair cropped short and was dressed like her four companions in a whale skin vest that was so worn that it gleamed.
It was the morning of the nineteenth day of August after the second night of the full moon the woman from the islands put the mug to her lips while telling her story. Her hand Triss noticed was the color of old bricks and her bare gnarled muscle-laced arm probably measured twenty inches in circumference. Triss had a waist circumference of twenty-two inches.
At first light said the fisherwoman as she cast a look at the faces of her audience we drove our barge into the sound between Ard Skellig and Spikeroog on the oyster bed where we usually deploy our salmon nets. We were in a hurry because the western sky was mighty dark and it looked like a storm was brewing. We needed to take the salmon from the nets as quickly as possible or else – you know how it is when you can finally run out after a storm is finished and the only things in the nets are eroded heads the entire catch is over.
The audience mostly residents of Bremervoord and Cidaris people who lived by the sea and whose existence depended on it nodded and murmured sympathetically. Triss usually only took salmon in the form of slices to her mouth but she nodded and murmured too so she would not attract attention. She was here incognito on a secret mission.
We had arrived continued the fisherwoman after she had emptied her pitcher and gestured that one of the listeners should buy her a second. We had arrived and was just about to haul in the nets and catches when Gudrun the daughter of Sturli shouts out loud! And points a finger to starboard! We look back and see something black fly through the air but its not a bird! For a moment my heart stopped because I immediately thought this is a Wyvern or a small Slyzard which of course are sometimes known to fly to Spikeroog especially in winter and particularly on the west wind. But now the black thing splashes into the water! And sends up a four-foot wave: whoosh! Right into our nets. Its caught in a net in the water and wriggling like a seal because it took all we all had everyone who was there and we were eight women! It took all of our power to jerk and bang it onto the deck! And only then did we unlock our mouths! Because it was a woman! In a black dress with hair as black as a crow. Rolled into the net between two salmon one of which as I sit here was twenty-four and a half pounds!
The fisherwoman from the Skellig Islands blew the froth from a new pitcher and took a swig. None of the listeners said or expressed disbelief although even the oldest people could not remember a salmon of so impressive weight ever having been caught.
The Black Hair in the nets continued the woman from the islands coughs spits water and pulls the net and Gudrun nervous because she is pregnant starts screaming A Kelpie! A Kelpie! A Mermaid! but any fool could see this was no kelpie for a kelpie would have long since torn the net and how could such a monster have been drawn onto the boat! And a mermaid it was not because it had no fish tail and mermaids always have fish tails! And then she fell from the sky into the sea and who has ever seen a kelpie or a mermaid that flies in the sky? But Skadi the daughter of Una who cant think for herself also starts crying A Kelpie! and already she reaches for a boat hook! And starts swinging the boat hook at the nets! But from the net there is a blue flash and there Skadi flies off squealing! Boat hook to the left Skadi to the right I will drop dead if I lie she does three somersaults and smacks her butt into the deck! Ha as it turned out it was a sorceress in the net as bad as a medusa a scorpion or an electric eel! And then the witch is on the defensive and also begins to scream and curse at us! And the net hisses and smokes and everything stinks because its so magical! We see that this is no fun…
The woman from the islands emptied her pitcher and immediately started on the next.
That its no fun – she belched loudly wiping her nose and mouth with the back of her hand – a magician and we have her caught in the nets! Ill note that this magic as I sit here is already beginning to rock the barge. So there was no hesitation! Britta the daughter of Karen has grabbed the net with a boat hook and I grabbed an oar and start to give it to her! Give it to her! Give it to her!
The beer foamed up and spilled out onto the table and a couple of pitchers toppled to the ground. The audience wiped their cheeks and brows but no one said a word of complaint or reproach. A story is a story. It has its own rules.
Then the witch understood who she was dealing with. The fisherwoman thumped herself in her large chest looking around defiantly. Not to be trifled with the women of Skellige is! She says that she surrenders to us and promises she will release any enchantments or spells. And she says to call her by her name: Yennefer of Vengerberg.
The audience began to murmur. Hardly two months had passed since the events on Thanedd Island and they still remembered the names of the Nilfgaard-bought traitors. Especially the famous Yennefer.
We had her the woman from the islands continued brought her from Ard Skellig to Kaer Trolde to the earl Crach an Craite. Since then I have not seen her. The earl was away on a trip it is said and when he came back the magician was severely received but later he treated her politely and kindly. Hmmm… But Ive just been waiting for a vengeful surprise for me from the sorceress cause I walloped her one with the oar. I thought she might blacken me to the Earl. But no. She didnt speak a word of complaint that I know of. A decent woman. Later when she killed herself I even felt sorry for her…
Yennefer is no longer alive? called Triss who in her fright forgot her secret mission and the fact that she was supposed to be incognito. Yennefer of Vengerberg is no longer alive?
Well she lives no longer. The fisherwoman drank her beer. Shes as dead as a mackerel. She killed herself with her own magic when she was performing magic tricks. It was only recently on the last day of August just before the new moon. But thats a whole different story…
Dandelion! Do not sleep in the saddle!
I am not sleeping! I am thinking creatively!
Thus we rode dear reader through the forests of Riverdell to the east towards Caed Dhu in search of the druids that could help us find Ciri. Why we behaved so terribly I will tell. First however I want to write in the interest of historical truth about our company – and its individual members.
The vampire Regis was about four hundred years old. If he was not lying this meant that he was the oldest of us all. Of course it could be an ordinary swindle for who among us would be able to verify it? But I preferred to believe that our vampire was telling the truth because he had also told us that he had irrevocably abandoned the practice of drinking human blood – and thanks to this statement we slept a little easier at night. Initially I noticed that Milva and Cahir tended to timidly rub their necks after waking but they stopped that quickly. Regis was – or seemed to be – a vampire of absolute honor. He had vowed he would not suck blood therefore he sucked none.
However he had his weaknesses and I do not mean those that grew out of his vampiric nature. Regis was an intellectual and demonstrated this often. He had the unnerving habit of announcing allegations and truths with the tone and air of a prophet to which we soon stopped responding because the announced allegations either actually were true or at least seemed to be sound or they were unable to be verified which amounted to the same thing. Regiss most unbearable mannerism was that he would answer a question before the questioner had finished with the formulation of his question – or sometimes even before the questioner had begun the formulation. Ive always held this as supposed evidence of high intelligence instead of evidence of rudeness and arrogance properties that fit well in the university environment or circles at court but are difficult to endure from a companion with whom you spend the day riding stirrup to stirrup and the nights sleeping in the same camp. Thanks to Milva however no one got seriously upset by this. In contrast to Geralt and Cahir who seemed to be prompted to adopt the style of the vampire and even to compete with him in this regard the archer Milva enacted a simple and unpretentious solution. The third time she noticed him answer her in the middle of a question she swore at him vigorously using words and descriptions that could even drive an old trooper to blush with shame. And wonder of wonders it helped – the vampire laid aside the enervating style in a jiffy. The lesson learned was that the most effective defense against an attempt of intellectual dominance is to against the intellectual who wants to dominate properly let out the pig.
I have the impression that Milva was having difficulty coping with her tragic accident and loss. I write: I have the impression as I am aware that I as a man may have no idea what such an accident and such a loss means for a woman. Although I am a poet and a man of the pen even my trained and experienced imagination fails here and I cannot do anything about it.
The archer regained her physical capacity soon – with the psychological it looked worse. She would not say a word for whole days from morning to night. She would gladly disappear and hold herself apart which started to worry everyone a little. But at last came the change for the better. Milva reacted like a Dryad or an elf – violent impulsive and hard to understand. One morning before our eyes she pulled out her knife and without a word cut off the braid at the nape of her neck. I do not deserve this because Im not a virgin she said when she saw us watching open-mouthed. And also not a widow she added this concludes my mourning. From that moment on she was like before – harsh caustic with a loose tongue and with quick access to words not socially acceptable. What we concluded was that she really had gotten over the crisis.
The third and no less strange member of our company was a Nilfgaardian who wanted to prove that he was not a Nilfgaardian. Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach as he claimed…
Cahir Mawr Dyffryn son of Ceallach Dandelion said emphatically as he aimed the little lead pencil at the Nilfgaardian. I have to accept a lot of things in this highly esteemed company that I do not like things that I almost cannot stand. But not this! I cannot stand it when someone watches over my shoulder while I am writing! And I do not intend to accept it!
The Nilfgaardian moved away from the poet and after a brief reflection grabbed his saddle and blanket coat and pulled them closer to Milva who appeared to be dozing.
Sorry he said. Forgive the intrusion Dandelion. I sat looking quite automatically from ordinary curiosity. I thought you were drawing a map or making calculations.
Im not an accountant! The poet jumped up literally and figuratively. And not a cartographer! And even if I were it would not justify you impersonating a crane to spy on my notes!
Ive already apologized Cahir reminded him dryly as he set up his camp at the new location. Ive come to terms with things and gotten used to many things in this highly esteemed company. But I still maintain that I only have to apologize once.
Indeed the witcher agreed which surprised everyone including the young Nilfgaardian. Youve become damned irritable Dandelion. Its obvious that its somehow related to the paper you recently besmirched with that piece of lead.
True confirmed the vampire Regis as he added some birch twigs to the fire. Our Minstrel has recently become irritable and anxious to have closed discrete seclusion. But no in carrying out his natural needs witnesses cannot interfere which incidentally in our situation is not surprising. The bashful seclusion and irritability over prying eyes relate exclusively to the described paper and use of the stylus. I wonder if he seals our presence in a poem? A rhapsody? An epic? A romance? A stanza?
No said Geralt as he moved closer to the fire and threw a blanket over his shoulders. I know him. This cant be poetic speech because he is not blaspheming muttering to himself or counting syllables on his fingers. He stopped writing so its prose.
Prose the vampire flashed his sharp canine teeth which he usually tried to avoid. A novel perhaps? Or an essay? A morality? Damn it Dandelion! Stop torturing me! Tell me what you write?
Memoirs.
How?
From these notes – Dandelion showed them a tube filled with papers – my lifes work will be created. Memoirs under the title Fifty Years of Poetry.
A silly title Cahir said dryly. Poetry has no age.
And if you insist that it has one added the Vampire then it is decidedly older.
You dont understand. The title means that the author of the work has spent fifty years no more and no less in the service of his mistress poetry.
Then it is even greater nonsense said the witcher. You Dandelion are still not forty. Writing was drummed into you in the temple-cliff school with a cane in the butt when you were eight. Even if we assume that you have written rhymes ever since youve served your mistress poetry no longer than thirty years. But I dont have to assume because you yourself have frequently said that you started seriously rhyming and composing melodies when you were nineteen inspired by the love of Countess de Stael. That makes one less than twenty years of service Dandelion. So from which sleeve are you shaking out these fifty years mentioned in the title? Is it supposed to be a metaphor?
I the bard said grandly grasp intellectually wide horizons. I describe the present but reach into the future. The work that I am undertaking I think to publish in about twenty to thirty years and then no one can dispute the statement in the title.
Aha. Now I understand. What amazes me is the foresight. You usually care little for the morrow.
I still care little about the morrow the poet declared condescendingly. I think of the afterlife. And of eternity!
At least from the point of view of future generations Regis said it is not very ethical to begin the writing now. Future generations may expect that a work with such a title has been written from a centenary perspective an actual person who has actually had a half century of knowledge and experience…
Someone whose experience includes half a century Dandelion cut him off must naturally be a seventy-year old grandfather with his brain eaten by sclerosis. When that is me I shall sit on the porch and fart in the wind not dictate memoirs because people would laugh. I will not make this mistake and will write my memoirs before while I am in full possession of the creative forces. Later just before the surrender I shall make only cosmetic changes.
He might have a point. Geralt massaged his aching knee and bent it carefully. Especially for us. For although we undoubtedly appear in his work and although he has certainly allowed nothing good to be said about us we wont care much in fifty years.
What is a half a century? the vampire smiled. A moment a fleeting blink… Oh yes Dandelion a small note: Half a Century of Poetry in my opinion sounds better than fifty years.
Since I do not disagree. The troubadour bent over a sheet with a pencil and began to scratch it. I thank you Regis. Finally something constructive. Does anyone else have anything to add?
Ive got something Milva unexpectedly said and stuck her head out from under her blanket. Why are you looking at me like that? Because I cant read and write? Im not stupid! We are on an expedition to come to the aid of Ciri going into an enemy country with weapons in our hands. It may be that Dandelions scribblings fall into the enemys hands. And we all know the rhymer its no secret that hes a chatterbox and a gossip. They might hang us for his scrawl.
You are exaggerating Milva the vampire said mildly.
Indeed and strongly claimed Dandelion.
It also seems to me you are exaggerating said Cahir added carelessly. I do not know how it is with the Nordlings but it is not a crime to possess a manuscript in the empire and literary activity is not criminal.
Geralt gave him a sidelong look and with a loud crash broke the branch with which he had played. And yet libraries are set on fire in cities conquered by your cultured nation he said in an engaging tone but with clear undertones of accusation. But never mind that. Maria I also think you are exaggerating. Dandelions scribbling has no meaning as usual. Not for our safety.
Well I know what I know retorted the archer and sat up. Due to experience! My step-father when the royal treasurer was making a census took off running hid in the undergrowth and sat there for two weeks. Where the scribe is is also the judge he always said today they are writing to you tomorrow they hang on you. And he was right although he was a scumbag like no other. I hope that hes stewing in hell the son-of-a-bitch!
Milva threw off the blanket and sat down by the fire finally giving up on sleeping. It looked Geralt noticed like it would once again be a long night of conversation.
You did not like your stepfather I take it said Dandelion after a short silence.
I did not. Milva audibly gritted her teeth. Because he was a bastard. If my mother was not looking he would run up and grope me then claim he did nothing. So I finally lost control and hit him with a rake and as he fell I gave him a bit more – two kicks in the ribs and one in the course. He laid there for two whole days spitting blood… And I ran away from home into the wide world not waiting until he was healthy again. Then I heard that he died and my mom shortly after he… Hey Dandelion! Are you writing about this? Dont you dare! Dont you even dare do you hear me?
It was strange that Milva had joined us and astonishing that the vampire kept us company. But the strangest – and absolutely incomprehensible – motives were from Cahir who suddenly went from an enemy to something like a friend or at least an ally. The young man had proved that in the Battle on the Bridge when he chose without hesitation to side with the witcher against his own people. Through that act he had finally won our favor and dispelled our doubts. When I write our I refer to myself the vampire and the archer. For although Geralt had fought shoulder to shoulder with Cahir and although he had stood at his side facing death he still looked at the Nilfgaardian suspiciously and never considered him with favor. Though he sought to hide his resentment when a person is – as I have probably already pointed out – as straightforward as a halberd shaft it cannot be helped and at every turn the antipathy crept out like an eel from a leaky bucket.
The reason was obvious and it was Ciri.
As fate willed it I was on the island of Thanedd during the new moon in July when the bloody conflict between magicians broke out. On one side were sorcerers loyal to the kings on the other side were traitors incited by Nilfgaard. The traitors were supported by the Squirrels rebellious elves – and by Cahir son of Ceallach. Cahir had been sent to Thanedd on a special mission – to capture and kidnap Ciri. When Ciri defended herself she wounded him – the sight of the scar on Cahirs hand always leaves my mouth dry. It must have hurt like hell and two of the fingers still cannot bend.
And after all that we ended up saving him from a Hawkers wagon as his own people bound and took him towards a cruel execution. For what offense I asked were they going to execute him? Only because of his failure on Thanedd? Cahir is not talkative but I have an ear for hints. The lad is still not even thirty but he seems to have been a high-ranking officer in the Nilfgaardian Army. Since he is fluent in the common language which is rare among Nilfgaardians I think I know which branch of service Cahir was in and why he was promoted so quickly. And why he was entrusted with such a strange mission. A foreign mission no less.
Because Cahir had already attempted to kidnap Ciri. Nearly four years ago during the massacre in Cintra. That was the first time he felt providence which rules the fate of this girl.
It was pure chance that I talked to Geralt about this. It was on the third day after we had crossed the Yaruga and ten days before the equinox as we moved through the forests of Riverdell. Although very short the conversation was nevertheless full of unpleasant and disturbing sounds. And the witchers face and eyes already marked him as the harbinger of the atrocity that later erupted on the night of the equinox after the fair-haired Angouleme had joined us.
The witcher did not look at Dandelion. He did not look forward. He looked at Roachs mane.
Calanthe he picked up the thread again made a few knights take an oath just before she jumped to her death. They were not to allow Ciri to fall into Nilfgaardian hands. During the escape the knights were killed and Ciri was left alone in the midst of corpses and fires in the narrow streets of a burning city. She would not have escaped with her life no doubt about that. But he found her. He Cahir. He grabbed her by the throat and carried her away from the fire. Saved her. Heroic! Noble!
Dandelion held Pegasus back a little. They rode in the rear – Regis Milva and Cahir were a good fifty paces ahead of them but the poet did not want even one word of this conversation reaching the ears of the fellowship.
The problem is continued the witcher that our Cahir was commanded to be noble. He was as noble as the cormorant who does not gobble a caught fish because its had a choker placed around its neck making it impossible for it to swallow. He took the fish in his beak but could not swallow because he had to bring it back to his master. And when he did not his master was angry with the cormorant! The cormorant is now in disgrace! Maybe thats why he now seeks the companionship and friendship of fish? What do you think Dandelion?
The troubadour leaned forward in his saddle to avoid a low hanging branch of a linden tree. The branchs leaves were completely yellow.
Nevertheless he saved her life as you have said yourself. Thanks to him Ciri came away from Cintra unscathed.
And cried at night because she saw him in a dream.
Yet it was he who saved her. Stop trying to be so vindictive Geralt. Too much has changed what am I saying too much is changing day by day. This resentful annoyance is obviously no use to you. He saved Ciri. That is and remains a fact.
Geralt finally unlocked his gaze from Roachs mane lifting his head. Dandelion glanced at his face and then hurriedly looked away.
The fact of the matter remains the witcher repeated in an evil metallic voice. Oh yes! He cried this fact to my face on Thanedd but he was terrified when he saw my blade and the words got stuck in his throat. That fact and that cry should not be the case for me not to kill him. Well it happened that way and cannot be changed now. Too bad. Because even then on Thanedd I thought to begin a chain with him. A long chain of death a chain of revenge one which people would still be talking about after a hundred years. One that people would be afraid to talk about after dark. Do you understand that Dandelion?
Not particularly.
Then go to the devil.
That conversation was disgusting and the witchers face was repulsive during it. Oh dear I did not like it when he got into such moods talking about stuff like that.
I must confess however that after his pictorial comparison with a cormorant – I began to get restless. The fish in its beak carried to Nilfgaard where the fish was drugged disemboweled and roasted! A really pleasant analogy a real joyful outlook…
Reason however spoke against such fears. Ultimately – if you stay with the fish parables: who were we? Minnows small oily-rich minnows. Cahir could not hope for imperial favor in exchange for such a paltry catch. He was by the way by no means the pike he wanted to present himself as. He was a minnow just like us. Does anyone ever notice minnows in a time of war when iron shapes both the world and the destinies of men?
Ill bet my head that no one in Nilfgaard even remembers Cahir anymore.
Vattier de Rideaux the chief of military intelligence for Nilfgaard listened to the imperial reprimand with his head bowed.
So thats it continued Emhyr var Emreis acidly. The department that consumes three times as much funding from the state budget as public education art and culture put together is not even able to locate a single man. Because apparently the man simply vanished and remains hidden even though I spend incredible sums of money on the department so that no one can hide from it! A man guilty of treason makes a fool of your department to which I have given enough resources and privileges to rob the innocent in their sleep. Believe me Vattier next time the Council discusses the need to cut the intelligence budget I will have a sympathetic ear. You can trust me on that!
Your Imperial Majesty – Vattier de Rideaux cleared his throat – will no doubt make the right decision after careful consideration of all the pros and cons. Both the failures and the successes that have been reported. Your Majesty can be sure that the traitor Cahir aep Ceallach will not escape his punishment. Ive made an effort…
I do not pay you for efforts but for results. And they are moderate Vattier moderate! What of the matter with Vilgefortz? Where the hell is Cirilla? What are you mumbling? Louder!
I think Your Majesty should marry the girl that we keep in Darn Rowan. We need this marriage the legality of the sovereign lordship of Cintra the calming of the Skellig Islands and the insurgents in Attre Strept and Northern Mag Turga. We need a general amnesty peace in the hinterlands for the supply lines… We need the neutrality of Kovirs king Esterad Thyssen.
I know. But the girl in Darn Rowan is not the proper girl. I cannot marry her.
Your Imperial Majesty will forgive but does it matter whether it is more or less the proper girl? The political situation calls for a formal ceremony. And soon. The young lady will wear a veil. And when we finally find the real Cirilla the wedded wife is simply… exchanged.
Have you gone mad Vattier?
We have only shown the imposter briefly. Cintra has not seen the real Cirilla in four years and by the way it sounds she spent more time on the Skellig Islands than in Cintra anyway. I guarantee that nobody will notice the trick.
No!
Your Imperial…
No Vattier! I want the real Ciri! Now move your ass. Find me Ciri. Find Cahir. And Vilgefortz. Because Im sure wherever Vilgefortz is Ciri is near.
Your Imperial Majesty…
Im listening Vattier! Ive been listening this whole time!
In the past Ive suspected that the matter with Vilgefortz was an ordinary provocation. That the magician was killed or captured and that Dijkstras spectacular and noisy hunt for him only served to denigrate us and to justify bloody retaliation.
I had this suspicion as well.
However… it is not public knowledge in Redania but I know from my agent that Dijkstra has discovered one of the hideouts of Vilgefortz and there is evidence that the magician has carried out brutal human experiments. Specifically experiments on human embryos… and pregnant women. So if Vilgefortz had Cirilla in his power then I fear that the continued search for her…
Shut up damn it!
On the other hand Vattier de Rideaux hastily steered the conversation away obeying the unspoken order in the Emperors angry eyes it could all be disinformation. To discredit the magician. That would be like Dijkstra.
You should remove him and find Vilgefortz and Ciri! The devil take you! Do not speculate or make assumptions! Where is The Owl? Still in Geso? Does he have to turn over every stone and look into each hole? The girl is apparently not there and never was? The astrologer either made a mistake or he lied? These are all quotations from his reports. So what is he still doing there?
Coroner Skellen I dare to say has goals that are not so clear… His department which your Majesty has ordered him to form has built its base in Fort Rocayne in Maecht. This department let me add is a rather suspicious mob. Even more strange however is that Mr. Skellen hired a famous assassin in late August…
What?
He has hired a bounty hunter and asked him to liquidate a rampant gang in Geso. A laudable thing in itself but is that the task of the Imperial Coroner?
Are you sure that is not envy speaking Vattier? And that your report is not biased from jealousy?
I have noted only facts Your Majesty.
I want to see facts – the Emperor said abruptly – Im sick of only hearing about them.
It had truly been a tough day. Vattier de Rideaux was tired. His daily schedule called for an hour or two of paperwork which should prevent him from drowning in pending documents tomorrow but even the thought of it made him shudder. No he thought by the gods no. The work will not run away. I will go home… No not home. The woman can wait. I am going to Cantarella. To the sweet Cantarella where I can relax as well…
He did not wait long. He simply stood up took his coat and went outside. When his secretary tried to give him a portfolio of saffian leather filled with urgent documents awaiting his signature – he stopped her with a gesture of disgust. Tomorrow! Tomorrow is another day!
He left the palace through the back entrance alongside the gardens and walked along a short avenue of cypress trees. He passed the artificial pond in which lived a carp of the venerable age of one hundred thirty-two years. Emperor Torres had been prone to it and gifted it a golden commemorative medal which was attached to the gill cover of the giant fish.
Good evening Viscount.
Vattier flicked his forearm shaking loose the stiletto hidden in his sleeve. The handle slipped into his hands.
You are risking a lot Rience he said coldly. Youre risking a lot to show your scorched visage in Nilfgaard. Ahh it must be a magical teleprojection…
Youve noticed? Vilgefortz guaranteed that no one will be able to guess that it is an illusion without contact.
Vattier put away the stiletto. He had guessed that it was an illusion but now he knew it.
Rience he said youre too cowardly to show up here in person. You know what you could expect.
The emperor is still prejudiced against me? And against my master Vilgefortz?
Your insolence is disarming.
Hell Vattier. I assure you that we are still on your side myself and Vilgefortz. Well I confess we have betrayed you because we gave you the wrong Cirilla but that was done in good faith may I be drowned if I lie. After the real one was gone Vilgefortz figured wrong was better than none. We thought you would not care…
Your insolence is not disarming but insulting. I have no intention to squander my time with an offensive illusion. When I finally catch you in your true form then we will see what kind of entertainment you can offer me and I will make sure that it takes a long time. I promise. But until then… Apage Rience.
I dont know you any more Vattier. The Vattier I knew even if the devil had appeared before him wouldnt fail to find out if it could be beneficial to him accidently or not before he performed the exorcism.
Vattier did not acknowledge the illusion by looking at it but instead watched the algae-covered carp lazily stir up the mud in the pond.
Beneficial? he finally repeated and pursed his lips with contempt. You? What could you give me? Perhaps the real Cirilla? Maybe your boss Vilgefortz? Perhaps Cahir aep Ceallach?
Halt! The illusion of Rience raised his illusory hand. Youve got it.
What have I got?
Cahir. We will procure the head of Cahir for you. Myself and my master Vilgefortz…
Mercy Rience snorted Vattier modify the sequence of names but still…
As you wish. Vilgefortz – with my humble help – will procure for you the head of Cahir son of Ceallach. We know where he is we can always pull him out of our sleeve if desired.
You have opportunities perhaps. Please are you telling me you have such good agents in the army of Queen Meve?
You wish to test me? Rience grimaced. Or do you really not know? Probably the latter. Cahir my dear Viscount is… We know where he is we know where he wants to go now and we know in whose company he travels. You want his head? We can get it.
The head Vattier said smiling which will no longer be able to tell what really happened on Thanedd.
That will probably be better replied Rience cynically. Why give Cahir the opportunity to give speeches? Our job is to appease the animosity between Vilgefortz and the emperor not to deepen it. I will procure the silent head of Cahir aep Ceallach. We will regulate it so that the merit goes to you and only you. Delivery within three weeks.
The age-old carp in the pond fanned the water with its pectoral fins. The carp thought Vattier must be full of wisdom. But wise in regards to what? Always the same mud and same water lilies.
Your price Rience?
A trifle. Where is Stefan Skellen and what are his plans?
I told him what he wanted to know. Vattier de Rideaux stretched out on the pillow while he played with a golden lock of Carthia van Cantens hair. You see my sweet certain things have to be addressed wisely. And wise means conforming. If one is different you get nothing. Only rotten stinking mud and water in a basin. And what did they expect when the basin is made of marble and just a few steps from the palace? Am I right my sweet?
Carthia van Canten nicknamed Cantarella did not answer. Vattier did not expect her to. The girl was eighteen years old and generally speaking not the brightest. Her interests were limited to – at least for now – making love with – at least for now – Vattier. When it came to sex Cantarella was a natural talent; her technique and skill were surpassed only by her commitment and zeal. But this was not the most important thing about her.
Cantarella spoke little and rarely but she was an excellent and willing listener. He could speak his mind with her relax relax relax and mentally and spiritually rebuild himself.
In such a profession one expects a reprimand Vattier said bitterly because I have not found Cirilla. However thanks to my peoples work the army achieves success and thats nothing? And that the General Staff knows every move of the enemy thats nothing? And there were a few forts that my agents opened to the imperial troops rather than having to besiege them for weeks to win? But no there is no praise for it. Cirilla is the only important thing!
With an angry snort Vattier de Rideaux took a chalice filled with exquisite Est Est Toussaint from Cantarellas hands. It was a vintage that recalled the days when the Emperor was Emhyr var Emreis the little boy deprived of his right to the throne and cruelly insulted – and Vattier de Rideaux was the young intelligence officer insignificant in the departments hierarchy.
It had been a good year. For wines.
Vattier drank a little played with Cantrellas shapely breasts and talked. Cantarella listened devotedly.
Stefan Skellen my sweet murmured the chief of the imperial intelligence is a trickster and a conspirator. But I knew what he planned even before Rience there… I already have someone there… very close to Skellen… very close…
Cantarella untied the scarf that held her gown together and leaned down. Vattier felt her breath and sighed in anticipation of pleasure. A natural talent he thought. And then the soft hot and velvety-to-the-touch lips banished every thought from his head.
Carthia van Canten bestowed her talent to Vattier de Rideaux chief of the imperial intelligence slowly and skillfully. This was not Carthias only talent. But Vattier de Rideaux had no idea of that.
He did not know that despite appearances Carthia van Canten possessed an excellent memory and an intelligence like quicksilver.
Everything Vattier told her every scrap of information every word that he had uttered to her during their meeting – Carthia repeated the following morning to the sorceress Assir var Anahid.
Yes Ill bet my head that no one in Nilfgaard even remembered Cahir not even his fiancé if he had one.
But more about that later first we will return to the day and place that we crossed the Yaruga. We rode in somewhat of a rush to the east towards the Black Forest known as Caed Dhu in the Elder Speech. We sought the Druids who would be able to predict Ciris whereabouts and may be able to interpret the strange dreams that haunted Geralt. We rode through the forests of the upper Riverdell which the left bank is also called a wild and almost uninhabited region. It is located between the Yaruga and the foothills of Amell Mountains an area called the North Case. It is bordered on the east by the valley of Dol Angra and on the west by a marshy lake district whose name escapes me.
This area has never been claimed by anyone specifically. Therefore no one has ever really known who owned the area and who really ruled over it. The rulers of Temeria Sodden Cintra and Rivia in succession have apparently had something to say on this matter. They considered various areas of the left bank as fiefdoms of their crowns and occasionally enforced that notion with fire and iron. But then the Nilfgaardian Armies came from behind the Amell Mountains and no one had anything more to say. Nor did any doubts remain about the feudal law of the land and property – everything south of the Yaruga belonged to the Empire. At the time I am writing this even many lands to the north of the Yaruga belong to the Empire. Though lacking precise information I do not know how many they are or how far they extend to the north.
Returning to Riverdell dear reader allow me a digression on historical developments: The story of a given territorys origin and formation is often somewhat random a side effect of conflicts of external forces. The history of a country is very often made by outsiders. Foreign affairs are the cause but the locals – always and without exception – bear the effects.
For Riverdell this rule applies in full.
Riverdell was called the river country by its own people. Through the ongoing year-long marches and battles they had sunk into poverty and had to emigrate. Villages and hamlets were burned and the ruins of homesteads and fallow fields were devoured by the wilderness. Trade came to a standstill; the caravans avoided the dilapidated roads and paths. The few that remained in the river country were overgrown bullies. They mainly differed from wolverines and bears because they wore pants. At least some of them. And by that I mean: some wore pants and others did not. They were – mostly – a selfish boorish and silly people.
And they had no sense of humor.
The dark-haired daughter of the bee keeper tossed her annoying braid back and continued to work on the hand mill with furious energy. Dandelions efforts fizzled – the poets words seemed to have absolutely no effect on their targeted audience. Dandelion winked at the rest of the company and acted as if he sighed and raised his eyes to the ceiling. But he did not.
Give it to me he repeated and bared his teeth. Let me grind and you run into the cellar and fetch some beer. There must be a keg hidden somewhere in the cellar. Am I right beautiful?
Leave the girl alone sir said the angry wife of the bee keeper – a tall and slender woman of surprising beauty who worked in the kitchen. Ive already told you there is no beer.
Youve been told a dozen times sir said the bee keeper prompting his wife to jump to the side and interrupt the conversation the witcher and vampire were having. Well make pancakes with honey and then you can eat. But allow the girl to grind the corn into flour in peace because unless you brought a magician there can be no pancakes without flour! Let her work in peace.
Did you hear that Dandelion? cried the witcher. Let the girl work in peace and occupy yourself with something useful. Or write your memoirs!
I want to drink. I like drinking something before eating something. I have a few herbs and Im going to make an infusion. Grandmother can hot water be found in the hut? Im asking – is there hot water?
The old woman on the bench who was the mother of the bee keeper looked up from the stocking she was stuffing. Yes my dear it can be found she mumbled. Its just that its gone cold.
Dandelion sighed and resignedly sat down at the table where the company was chatting with the bee keeper who they had met in an early morning encounter in the forest. The bee keeper was a thickset stocky man with black and terribly overgrown hair. It was no wonder that he had frightened the company when he suddenly emerged from the brush – they had thought he was a lycanthrope. The funniest part was that the first one to scream A werewolf! A werewolf! was the vampire Regis. There was some confusion but the matter was quickly cleared up and the bee keeper although wild in appearance proved to be hospitable and courteous. The company accepted the invitation to his home without hesitation. The home – in the jargon of the bee keeper called an estate – was located in a cleared glade. The bee keeper lived there with his mother wife and daughter. The latter two were women of above-average and somewhat downright amazing beauty that clearly signified that they were the descendants of a Dryad or Hamadryad.
In the discussions that followed the bee keeper immediately gave the impression that he would only talk about bees hives hives on tree tops drilling hives smoking out hives honeycomb wax and honey. But first impressions turned out to be deceptive.
The situation? How should it be? Same like always. You must deliver ever-higher taxes. Two pints of honey and an entire wax disc. I slave away to get enough together and sit from morning to night on the board cleaning the hives… To whom do I pay taxes? Well whoever asks for them how should I know who is currently in power? Lately its been to Nilfgaard. Because we are now a Province of the Empire or something. And if I sell any honey for cash the emperor takes a cut of it. The Emperor looks prettier than the others but really the situation is just as strict. So…
Two dogs one black and one red-brown sat down opposite the vampire lifted their heads and began to howl. The bee keepers hamadryad wife turned from the stove and missed one of them with the broom.
A bad omen said bee keeper when dogs howl at midday. So… what do you wish to speak of?
Of the Druids of Caed Dhu.
Ha! Is that a joke my noble lords? You really want to go to the Druids? Are you tired of living or what? Its death! The mistletoe cutters capture anyone who dares to enter their glades tie them to a willow trunk and roast them over a low flame.
Geralt threw Regis a glance. Regis winked at him. They both knew very well that the rumors that circulated about the Druids were invented. Milva and Dandelion on the other hand listened with more interest now than before. And with obvious anxiety.
Some say continued the bee keeper that the mistletoe cutters are exacting vengeance against the Nilfgaardians who started it all by harassing the Druids namely because they marched through Dol Angra and the sacred oak groves and started to attack the Druids without reason. Others say that the Druids started it because they captured a few of the Imperials and tortured them to death and now Nilfgaard pays it home to them. In truth no one actually knows. But one thing is certain if the Druids catch you they bind you to a willow trunk and roast you. To go to them is to go to certain death.
We do not fear them said Geralt calmly.
Of course. The bee keeper looked at the witcher Milva and Cahir who had just come into the hut after feeding the horses. One can see that youre not timid people youre combative and fortified. Ha those such as you can go peacefully… well… except that your efforts and travels have been in vain – the mistletoe cutters are gone from the black trees. Nilfgaard has oppressed them pushed them out of Caed Dhu. They are not there anymore…
Just like that?
Just like that. The mistletoe cutters have left.
Where did they go?
The bee keeper threw his Hamadryad wife a look and was silent for a moment.
Where? Repeated the witcher.
The bee keepers striped cat sat in front of the vampire and began to meow loudly. The Hamadryad wife gave it a smack with her broom.
A bad omen when cats meow in the middle of the day gasped the bee keeper strangely confused. And the Druids… they… have fled to the North Case. Yes. Thats right. To the North Case.
Some sixty miles south estimated Dandelion unconcernedly almost cheerfully. Under the witchers gaze however he quieted immediately.
In the ensuing silence the only sound was the evil meowing of the cat as it was chased out of the house.
Well said the vampire what difference does it make?
The following morning brought more surprises. And puzzles. However their solutions were very quickly found.
The fact strikes me said Milva who was the first to crawl out of the haystack after being awakened by voices. The fact strikes me that I am always right. Look at this Geralt.
The clearing was filled with people. It was obvious at first glance that five or six bee keepers had gathered here. The experienced eye of the witcher also spotted a few trappers and at least one coal burner in the crowd. All together they were about twenty men ten women a dozen teenagers of both sexes and too many children to count. They were equipped with the six wagons twelve oxen ten cows four goats and sheep and an ample amount of all kinds of dogs and cats. The amount of barking and meowing taking place under these circumstances undoubtedly had to be considered a bad omen.
I want to know – Cahir rubbed his eyes – what is this supposed to mean?
Trouble observed Dandelion pulling straw from his hair. Regis was silent but his expression was strange.
We invite the noble lords to breakfast said the bee keeper when he noticed them. He had been accompanied to the haystack by a broad-shouldered man. Its ready. Oatmeal with milk. And honey… And allow me to introduce Jan Cronin our eldest bee keeper…
A pleasure lied the witcher without returning the bow because his knee hurt like hell. And this crowd who are they?
Well… the bee keeper scratched his head. You see winter is coming… The honey is already broken and the new hives are drilled… its once again time for us to move to the North Case to the town of Riedbrune… with the honey now supplied we will spend the winter there… But the woods they are dangerous to travel… alone…
The eldest bee keeper cleared his throat. The bee keeper seemed to pull himself together a bit and looked at Geralt.
You are mounted and armed he stammered. You look like you are brave and able to put up a fight. With you we can travel anywhere without fear… And you will benefit as well… We know every trail every forest every floodplain and every scrub… And we will provide you with food…
And the Druids Cahir said coldly have moved away from Caed Dhu. And onto the North Case. What a strange coincidence.
Geralt walked slowly to the bee keeper. He grabbed him with both hands by the front of his jacket. But immediately afterward he changed his mind let go of the jacket and smoothed it. He said nothing. Asked no questions. But still the bee keeper hurried with his explanation.
I told the truth! I swear! May I sink into the ground if I was lying! The mistletoe cutters are gone from the Caed Dhu! Theyre not there!
And they are on the North Case yes? growled Geralt. The same place you and your rabble are going? Where you would like to travel with an armed escort? Speak lad. But remember what you said because you actually might end up in the ground!
The bee keeper lowered his eyes and stared nervously at the ground under his feet. Geralt eloquently remained silent. Milva who had finally understood what the witcher had implied cursed indecently. Cahir snorted disapprovingly.
And? urged the witcher. Where have the Druids gone?
Well sir who should know where they are the bee keeper finally stammered. But they might be on the North Case… Its as good a guess as anywhere else. The North Case has so many great oaks and the Druids love oak forests…
Behind the bee keeper now stood two of elder Cronins hamadryads his wife and daughter. It was apparent and fortunate that the daughter took after her mother and not her father. The witcher could not help thinking that the bee keeper compared to his wife like a wild boar to a mare. He noticed a few women approaching from behind the hamadryads. They were much less beautiful but all three looked at him pleadingly.
He threw a glance at Regis not knowing whether he should laugh or curse.
The vampire shrugged. Ultimately he said the bee keeper has the right of it Geralt. All in all it is probable that the Druids have moved to the North Case. That terrain fits them quite well.
This probability – the witchers look was very very cold – do you think it is big enough to suddenly change direction and strike out at random with this rabble?
Regis again shrugged his shoulders. Whats the difference? Consider: the druids are not in Caed Dhu which eliminates this direction. A return to the Yaruga I believe is not up for debate. All other directions are therefore equally good choices.
Really? The temperature of the witchers voice matched his eyes. And from all these other directions which do you consider to be the most appropriate? The direction the bee keeper travels in? Or a completely different direction? Can you determine that in your infinite wisdom?
The vampire turned to the bee keeper the elders the hamadryads and the other women. And what he asked earnestly are you so afraid of good people that you ask for an escort? What do you fear? Say it honestly.
Oh dear sirs sighed Jan Cronin as all too real horror appeared in his eyes. Thats the real question there… We have to travel through the wet wasteland! And it dear sir is horrible! There are Drowners Sawpads Endregas Gryffens and other such horrible monstrosities! The last time we went in there two weeks ago a wood sprite caught my son and he only had time to groan before he was gone. Are you surprised that we dont trust ourselves to go in there with our women and children? Hmm?
The vampire looked at the witcher and made a very serious face. In my infinite wisdom he said I recommend that the most appropriate direction is the direction that is most appropriate for a witcher.
And so we journeyed south to the North Case a tract of land at the base of the Amell Mountains. We went with a large entourage which had everything: young maidens bee keepers trappers women children young maidens pets household goods young maidens. And large amounts of honey. This honey stuck to everything even the young maidens.
The train moved at the pace of oxen and pedestrians. Our marching speed was reduced but not because we had gone astray. Rather everything went like clockwork – the bee keeper knew the routes the trails and the dikes between the lakes. And this knowledge paid off oh yes. It began to drizzle and suddenly the whole damn river country sank into a fog as thick as porridge. Without the bee keeper we would have inevitably gotten lost somewhere deep in the swamps. We did not have to waste time or energy for the procurement and preparation of food – we had three sufficient meals a day albeit modest. And after dinner we were allowed to lie belly-up for a while.
In short it was wonderful. Even the witcher the old grouch and complainer began to smile more often and to enjoy life because he had calculated that we covered fifteen miles a day a feat we had not accomplished since we had left Brokilon. It had nothing to do with the witcher though because although the wet wasteland was so wet that one can hardly imagine anything dry we did not meet any monsters. Well at night the ghosts howled a bit the forest-banshees cried a bit and pale lights danced on the moors a bit. But nothing sensational.
We were a little worried however that we were back to travelling in a random direction and again had no clearly specified target. But how did the vampire Regis put it – it is better to go forward without a goal than to have a goal and stay in one place and it is certainly better than to stay in one place without a goal.
Dandelion! Strap on your tube more thoroughly! It would be a shame to drop half a century of poetry into the ferns.
Do not worry! I wont lose it you can be sure of that. And I will not let it be taken away! Anyone who wants to take this tube away will have to take it from my cold dead body. May I ask Geralt what is causing your sparkling smile? Wait let me guess… Congenital idiocy?
It came to pass that the team of archaeologists from the University of Castell Graupian conducted excavations at Beauclair under an ancient charcoal layer which indicated a large fire. They pressed forward to an even older layer dating to the 13th Century BC. In this layer the remains of walls of mud and mortar formed a sealed cavern which the scholars excavated with great enthusiasm and found two excellently-preserved human skeletons: a woman and a man. Beside the skeletons they found – in addition to weapons and numerous small artifacts – a thirty-inch long tube of solidified leather. The leather had a coat of arms embossed in faded colors though the rhombuses and lions were still visible. The groups head Professor Schliemann an eminent specialist in the Sigillography of the Dark Ages identified these as the emblems of Rivia an ancient kingdom whose location is not known for sure.
The enthusiasm of archaeologists reached its climax for manuscripts were kept in such tubes in the dark ages and the weight of the container led them to believe that there were plenty of papers and parchments inside. The extremely well-preserved condition of the tube gave hope to the idea that the documents would be legible and shed light on the darkness vanished in the past. The century would speak! It was an incredible stroke of luck a victory of science that could not be wasted. As a precautionary measure a linguist and researcher of dead languages had been summoned from Castell Graupian as well as professionals who would be capable of opening the tube without the slightest risk of damaging the precious contents.
Meanwhile rumors of a treasure circulated among Professor Schliemanns employees. As chance would have it these words came to the ears of three individuals who had previously been grave robbers but were now employed by the excavation to work in the clay. They were known by the names: Grabsch Zapp and Kamil Ronstetter. Convinced that the tube was literally filled with gold and jewels the three hired excavators stole the priceless artifact in the middle of the night and fled into the forest. There they kindled a very small fire and sat around it.
What are you waiting for? Zapp said to Grabsch. Open the tube!
I would but it wont budge complained Grabsch at Zapp. Its clamped as rat shit!
Then give it a kick with your boots you fucking rat! Kamil Ronstetter recommended.
Grabsch was speechless after he opened the priceless discovery and the contents fell onto the ground.
Rat shit! cried out Zapp in surprise. Whats that?
The question was stupid because it was obvious at first glance that it was sheets of paper. Therefore Grabsch gave no answer but took one of the sheets in his hand and held it in front of his nose. For a long moment he stared at the strange-looking characters.
Written all over he finally explained professionally. These are letters!
Letters? cried Ronstetter Kamil pale with horror. Written letters? Oh rat shit!
It describes magic! Zapp gasped in horror and his teeth rattled. Letters means witch stuff! Dont touch the rat shit! Because you can get infected!

The last and first name of the witness?
Selborne Kenna. Sorry I mean Joanna
Occupation?
Miscellaneous services.
Does the witness make fun? The witness should mind the fact that this is a treason trial by an Imperial Court! The lives of many people will depend on the witnesss testimony because treason is punishable by death! The witness is reminded that she did not appear voluntarily before the court but was presented by the Citadel where she was being held in solitary confinement and whether she is returned or is released into the world depends among other things on the testimony of the witness. The Court has permitted this long tirade to make the witness aware of just how completely inappropriate it is that such antics and jokes have even been brought into this room! They are not only tasteless but may also have extremely serious consequences towards the witness. The witness has half a minute to think about it. Afterwards the Tribunal will ask the question again.
Im ready Your Honor.
Please address us as High Tribunal. The occupation of the witness?
Im a psionic High Tribunal. But mainly in the employ of Imperial Intelligence Service which means…
Please give brief and concrete answers. If any additional explanations are needed you will be asked for them. The court is aware of the fact that the witness cooperated with the Imperial Intelligence Services. However I ask you to put on record what the name psionic means which the witness has used to describe her profession.
I have pure PPS that is to say I am a psychic of the first type with no possibility of PK. Specifically I do the following: speak and listen to the thoughts of others which can be done from a distance with a wizard an elf or another psionic. And penetrate their minds to transmit an official order. That means forcing someone to do what I want. I am also clairvoyant but only under a sleep state.
Let the record show that the witness Joanna Selborne is a psionic one with extrasensory abilities. She is capable of telepathy tele-empathy and precognition under hypnosis but has no psychokinetic abilities. The witness is reminded that the use of magic and extrasensory abilities is strictly prohibited in this hall. We continue with the interrogation. When where and under what circumstances was the witness exposed to the person that has been posing as Cirilla the princess of Cintra?
The fact is that I had never heard the name Cirilla until I was in the slammer… that is in solitary confinement High Tribunal. During the investigation I was told that she was the same person who had always been mentioned in my presence as Falka or the Cintrierin. However the circumstances were such that I need to describe the timeline which will make things clear. They were this: I was approached in a tavern in Aetolia by Dacre Silifant who is sitting there…
Let the record show that the witness Joanna Selborne has voluntarily called the accused Silifant. Please continue.
Dacre High Tribunal was in the process of recruiting a crew… That is an armed division. Murderers and assassins both men and women… Dufficey Kriel Neratin Ceka Chloe Stitz Andres Vierny Til Echrade… All no longer living… And those who have survived are mostly seated here under guard…
Please specify exactly when the witnesss encounter with the defendant Silifant took place.
It was last year in the month of August towards the end. I do not remember the exact date. In any event it was not in September because that September ha left an impression on me! Dacre who had heard of me somewhere said that he needed a psionic for his crew and one that was not afraid of magic because they would have to deal with wizards. The work he said was for the Emperor and Empire it paid well and the commander of the crew would be none other than The Owl himself.
By The Owl the witness refers to Stefan Skellen the Imperial Coroner?
That is who I mean sure.
Let the record take note. When and where did the witness meet Coroner Skellen?
That was in September on the fourteenth in the small fort Rocayne. If the High Tribunal will allow me Fort Rocayne is a border station which protects the trade route from Maecht to Ebbing Geso and Metinna. That is where Dacre Silifant led our crew fifteen horses. So overall we were twenty-two because there were others who were already posted in Rocayne under the command of Ola Harsheim and Bert Brigden.
The wooden floor echoed with the sounds of heavy boots clinking spurs and clattering metal buckles. Greetings Stefan!
Not only did The Owl remain sitting he never even took his legs off the table. He waved his hand briefly a very stately gesture. Finally he said sullenly. Youve made me wait a long time for you Silifant.
Long? Dacre Silifant laughed. Thats a good one. You Stefan gave me four weeks time to find you about a dozen of the top guys in the Empire and its surroundings. Ive brought you a crew that couldnt be matched even with a year of recruiting! Is that not praise worthy eh?
Lets wait with the praise said Skellen coldly until Ive inspected your crew.
Im immediately concerned: theyre both mine and yours now Mr. Skellen. Lieutenants Neratin Ceka and Dufficey Kriel.
Greetings greetings. The Owl finally decided to stand up and his aides did likewise. Make yourselves known gentlemen… Bert Brigden Ola Harsheim.
We know each other well Dacre Silifant said as he and Ola Harsheim vigorously shook hands. We crushed the rebellion under the old Braibant in Nazair. That was great eh Ola? Ah classic! The horses were up to their fetters in blood! And Mr. Brigden is if Im not mistaken from Gemmera? Of the Gemmeran Pacifiers? Well he has friends in the crew! Ive got some Pacifiers.
Im very excited to have a look at them added The Owl. Shall we go?
Just a moment said Dacre. Neratin go and tell the crew that they need to make a great impression during the Lord Coroners inspection.
Is that a him or a her Neratin Ceka? The Owls eyes narrowed as he watched the officer leave. Is it a woman or a man?
Mr. Skellen… Dacre Silifant cleared his throat but when he spoke his voice was sure and his eyes were cold. That I do not know. Apparently it is a man but I have not verified the claim. On the other hand of Neratin Cekas qualities as an officer I have no doubts. What you asked would be important if I wanted to court him. But I do not want to court him. Or her either I suppose.
Youre right admitted Skellen after a short deliberation. Theres nothing more to say. Lets have a look at your crew Silifant.
Neratin Ceka the individual of undetermined gender had lost no time. When Skellen and his officers stepped into the courtyard the division had assumed a well-organized line formation. Neither a horses head nor a single foot stuck out as a prominent feature. The Owl cleared his throat for silence. What a nasty mob he thought. Oh if policy did not prohibit… Together such a mob could go into the border countries and rob murder rape and sow conflict… enough to make one feel young again… Oh if only policy allowed it!
Well Mr. Skellen? inquired Dacre Silifant his face flushed with hidden enthusiasm. How do you find them my great Owl?
The Owl let his gaze roam from face to face from silhouette to silhouette. Some he knew personally – for better or for worse. Others he knew because he had heard of them of their reputations.
Til Echrade the bright-haired elf scout from the Gemmeran Pacifiers. Rispat La Pointe a sergeant from the same company. And another gem: Cyprian Fripp the Younger. Skellen had been present at the execution of the elder. Both brothers were rumored to have sadistic tendencies.
Then casually and crookedly sitting in the saddle of a piebald mare was Chloe Stitz a professional thief who was occasionally hired and used by the Secret Services. The Owl quickly looked away from her brazen gaze and mischievous smile.
Andres Vierny a Redanian Nordling and a butcher. Stigward a pirate and a renegade from the Skellig Islands. Dede Vargas a devil of an assassin. Cabernet Turent a murderer of passion.
And others. All similar. They are all alike thought Skellen. A brotherhood whose members had all killed at least five people. All of them are akin to each other. The same movements the same gestures the same kind of talk walk and dress.
The same eyes. Indifferent and cold flat and motionless like snake eyes whose expression would change for nothing not even the most egregious atrocities.
Well? Mr. Stefan?
Not bad. Not a bad crew Silifant.
Dacre flushed again and saluted in the Gemmeran way knocking his fist to his chest.
In particular Skellen reminded him I requested a few who are familiar with magic. That fear neither magic nor sorcerers.
Ive taken it into consideration. Indeed here is Til Echrade! And another beside him there the classy Miss on the tall chestnut mare next to Chloe Stitz.
Bring the latter to me.
The Owl leaned on the railing tapping it with the studded shaft of his whip. Greetings folks!
Greetings Mr. Coroner!
Many of you continued Skellen as the echo of many greetings died down have previously worked with me for me or under my orders. For those who do not know me let me explain what I expect from my people and what I do not tolerate from my people. Know that I am not speaking just to hear the sound of my own voice.
Even today some of you will get jobs to start tomorrow morning. In the territory of Ebbing. I remember that Ebbing is officially an autonomous kingdom and that we have no right to take violent action there so I order that you will proceed with caution and discretion. You stand in the Imperial Service but I forbid you to imagine that is a reason for you to brag and to treat the local authorities arrogantly. I prohibit anyone to display such behavior. Is that clear?
Yes commander sir!
Here in Rocayne we are guests and I expect you to act like guests. I prohibit you to leave your assigned quarters without a compelling reason. I prohibit you to contact anyone outside of the fort. Well the officers will think of something to keep you from cracking out of boredom. Mr. Harsheim Mr. Brigden please point the division to their accommodations!
I had hardly dismounted High Tribunal when Dacre grabbed my arm. Lord Skellen he says wants to talk to you Kenna. So we went. The Owl was sitting with his feet up on a table tapping his whip against his boot tops. And he bursts out with the same question – whether I am the Joanna Selborne who was involved in the disappearance of the ship Star of the South. Then I told him that I had nothing to prove. He started laughing. I like he says people who have nothing to prove. Then he asked if I have an innate PPS talent. When I confirmed this he turned serious and said I thought to use your talents on the magicians but first youll have to deal with another person a person who is no less mysterious.
Is the witness sure that Coroner Skellen used those exact words?
Yes. Im psionic.
Continue please.
Then a messenger interrupted us. He was very dusty and you could see that he had not spared his horse. He had urgent news for The Owl so Silifant Dacre takes me to the stables and tells me he has a feeling we will spend the evening in the saddle due to the messenger. And right he was High Tribunal. Before anyone could even think about dinner half of the division was already on horseback. I was lucky – they took Til Echrade the Elf. And I was glad too because I was saddle sore for the next few days and my butt hurt me something horrible… And just then I started to menstruate…
The witness will not include vivid depictions of their own intimate feelings. And stay on topic. When did the witness discover the identity of this mysterious person mentioned by the Coroner Skellen?
I will tell you but I must tell it in the proper sequence or else everything will become so complicated that you will not be able to understand it! Back then those who had to hurry to the horses before dinner were hunters. They rode from Rocayne to Malhoun and they returned from there with some adolescent…
Nycklar was furious with himself so much so that he really would have loved to just get up and leave.
If only he had remembered the warnings that reasonable people had given him! Or even if he would have remembered the proverbs specifically the tale of the raven who could not keep his beak shut! If only he had just done what he had to do and returned home to Jealousy! But no! Excited by pride adventure riding a horse and a purse decorated with coins Nycklar had not been able to resist the chance to shine. Instead of returning directly from Claremont to Jealousy he had ridden to Malhoun where he had many friends many of whom were young ladies he was courting. In Malhoun he puffed himself up like a gander in the spring clamored blustered and galloped across the green. He bought the bar rounds in the tavern and threw money around with a straight face as he was a prince of the blood or at least a count.
And he talked.
He told them what had happened four days earlier in Jealousy. He told it all then changed to the long-nose version exaggerated fabled and finally downright lied – which did not disturb the audience at all. The regulars of the pub locals and newcomers listened all too readily. And Nycklar was well informed. And he put more and more his own person in the center of his inventions.
On the third evening his own tongue brought him trouble.
Dead silence fell at the sight of the people who entered the tavern. The silence was broken only by the sounds of the clink of spurs the clatter of metal buckles and the crunching of boots. The sounds were like the ominous bells that ring down from a tower before tragedy strikes a village.
Nycklar did not even get a chance to play the hero. He was packed so quickly out of the tavern that it was argued he had probably only touched the floor with his heels three times. His acquaintances who the day before when they were drinking at his expense had declared friendship unto death now silently lowered their heads almost under the table top as if under the tables naked women danced or some other wonder demanded their attention. Even the deputy representative of the sheriff who was present in the tavern turned to the wall and said not a peep.
Nycklar also said not a peep not asking who what where or why. The horror had transformed his tongue into a stiff dry peg.
They put him on his horse and bade him ride. For several hours. Then there was a fort with stockade and tower. A yard full of arrogant noisy well-armed soldiers. And a study. Three people in the room. A leader and two subordinates which was immediately obvious. The leader who was somewhat short dark and richly dressed spoke with astonishing politeness. Nycklars mouth dropped when he heard the leader apologize for the trouble and inconvenience and ensured him that no harm would be done. But he was not fooled. These people reminded him very much of Bonhart.
The impression proved to be surprisingly accurate. For these people were looking for Bonhart specifically. Nycklar as might have been expected since it was indeed his own tongue that had got him into this predicament immediately began to talk when prompted.
He was warned to tell the truth and to not embellish anything. He was warned politely but sternly and emphatically. The richly-dressed man was the one who gave him these warnings; he constantly played with a metal-tipped whip and his eyes were disgusting and evil.
Nycklar the son of the coffin-maker from the village of Jealousy told the truth – the whole truth and nothing but the truth. He told of the morning of the ninth of September in Jealousy when the bounty hunter Bonhart had exterminated the whole gang of Rats sparing only one bandits life – the youngest of them who was called Falka. He told how the people of Jealousy had gathered to see how Bonhart would finish and execute the prisoner but the crowd was deceived because miraculously Bonhart did not execute Falka – he didnt even torture her! He did nothing to her not even as much as an ordinary guy does to his wife on Saturday night when he comes home from the pub – that is to say a few kicks a couple to the face – and nothing more.
The richly-dressed gentleman ceased playing with the whip as Nycklar told of how Bonhart later sectioned off the heads of the slain Rats before Falkas eyes and how he tore off the heads gold earrings like he was picking raisins from a cake. How Falka tied to the hitching posts had tossed back and forth vomiting at this sight.
He told how Bonhart had then garnished Falka with a collar like the collar of a bitch and tugged her into The Chimeras Head. And then…
And then said the lad as he licked his lips over and over again the noble gentleman Bonhart ordered beer because he had gotten into a terrible sweat and his throat was parched. Then he suddenly cried that he would like to give someone a good horse and a full five florens in cash. Thats how he said it with those exact words. I immediately reported so no one could volunteer for the opportunity before me and because I was very keen on a horse and a bit of money. My father drank away all of the money he earned with the coffins. So I reported to him and asked which horse I could take certainly one of the Rats? The noble gentleman Bonhart looked at me a look that made a chill run down my spine and said I could take a kick in the ass but that I would have to earn the other things. What could I do? A horse at my fingertips quite literally for the horses of the Rats were tethered to the post. Specifically I wanted Falkas black mare – a uniquely beautiful animal. So I bowed and asked what I should do to earn them. And Lord Bonhart replied that I should ride to Claremont stopping in Fano on the way. On whichever horse I wanted. Though he must have known I had my eye on the black mare because he prohibited me from taking it. So I took the mare with the blaze on her…
Less colors of horses Stefan Skellen admonished him dryly. More concrete facts. What did Bonhart give to you?
The noble gentleman Bonhart wrote letters and told me to take very good care of them. I was to hand-deliver them over to people in Fano and Claremont.
Letters? What did they say?
How would I know that sir? I couldnt read them because they were sealed. Sealed by the ring of the Lord Bonhart.
But do you remember who the letters were addressed to?
Yes indeed I do. Lord Bonhart made me repeat it ten times so I wouldnt forget. I rode with no detours and hand delivered the letters to the correct people personally. Both told me that Im a bright lad and this noble businessman Lord even gave me a penny…
To whom did you hand over the letters? Stop your incoherent rambling!
The first letter was sent to Master Esterhazy a swordsmith and ironsmith in Fano. And the second to the noble Lord Houvenaghel a merchant in Claremont.
Did they perhaps open the letters in your presence? Maybe someone said something after reading? Think hard boy.
I dont know. I didnt pay attention at the time and I cant remember anything now…
Ola Mun. Skellen nodded to his adjutants without raising his voice in the least. Pull down the lads pants. I plan to leave about thirty whip marks.
I remember cried the lad. It just came back to me!
There is nothing better to recall memories – The Owl showed his teeth – than nuts with honey or a whip on the ass. Start talking.
In Claremont the businessman Lord Houvenaghel read the letter out loud because there was another gentleman there – a little pure halfling. To whom the Lord Houvenaghel said… uh… he said that at any moment there would be a rush to the bank such as the world has not yet seen. Thats what he said!
Thats all you can remember?
By my mothers grave I swear it! Please dont beat me sir! Have mercy!
Well well get up. Dont lick my boots! Here have a penny.
Thanks a million… Sir…
I said do not lick my boots. Ola Mun what do you make of it? What does a bank…
Panic Boreas Mun said suddenly. Not a rush but panic.
Yes cried the lad. Thats what he said! Its as if you were there sir!
Panic and rush! Ola Harsheim pounded his fist into his palm. A decent cipher but not overly imaginative. The word rush or panic is a warning against trackers or a raid. Bonhart has warned them that they should prepare for it! But from whom? Who is ahead of us?
Who knows? The Owl said thoughtfully. Who knows? We will have to send people to Claremont… And also to Fano. Youre in charge of it Ola. Have the groups split the duties… So listen boy…
Yes sir!
While you were setting off to deliver Bonharts letters he I suppose remained in Jealousy? But he was preparing to leave? Was he in a hurry? Did he perhaps say where he was going?
He did not. But he wouldnt have been ready to leave right away. He had commanded that his outer clothing which was terribly stained with blood was to be washed and cleaned so he ran around in just his shirt trousers and sword belt. Nevertheless I think he was in a hurry. He had killed the Rats and cut off their heads for a reward and he had to ride off in order to turn them in. And in order to turn in this Falka he had captured alive for someone. Thats his job right?
This Falka… did you get a good look at her? What are you smirking at you fool?
Oh sir! Did I get a good look at her? You bet! With all the details!
Take off your clothes repeated Bonhart. There was something in his voice that made Ciri flinch instinctively. But immediately rebellion won.
No!
She never even saw the movement of his fist which caught her in the eye. Her eyes flashed and the earth began to shake giving way under her feet and slamming into her suddenly painful hip. Her cheeks and ears burned like fire – she realized that she had not been hit with a fist but with the flat back of a hand.
He stood over her holding his clenched fist to her face. She saw a heavy signet ring in the form of a skull which had just stung her face like a hornet.
Since you didnt lose a front tooth this time he said with an icy voice the next time that I hear the word no from you I will knock out both of them. Take off your clothes.
She rose unsteadily and began to unlace laces and open buttons with shaky hands. The nearby population of Jealousys The Chimeras Head inn began to murmur clear their throats and stare. The inns landlady a widow of the blaze bent down behind the counter and pretended to be looking for something.
Take everything off. Even the last shreds.
I am not here thought Ciri while she undressed and stared dully at the floor. No one is here. Im not even here.
Stand legs apart.
Im not here. What is happening right now is nothing to me at all. Nothing at all. I feel nothing.
Bonhart laughed. I have the impression that you flatter yourself too much. I must dispel these fantasies. Im having you disrobe you idiot so that I can be sure that you have not hidden any magical seals talismans or amulets somewhere on your body. Not for me to enjoy the pathetic sight of your nudity. I cant imagine who would. Youre a scrawny adolescent as flat as a pancake and as ugly as sin. Even if I were keen on those attributes I think Id rather fuck a turkey.
He stepped closer and separated her clothes with his toe looking appraisingly. I said all of it! Rings earrings necklace bangles!
She hastily took off her jewelry. With a kick he pushed her blue fox-collared jacket her colorful scarves her belts made of silver chains and her gloves into a corner.
You arent going to doll yourself up like a parrot or a half-elf from a brothel! You can wear the rest of the clothes. And what are you all gaping at? Someone bring me some food because I am hungry! And you fat man look after my stuff at the laundry!
Im the Alderman here!
That is good Bonhart said emphatically. Under his gaze the Alderman of Jealousy seemed to become thinner. If the washing has damaged any of my stuff Ill officially hold you accountable. March off to the laundry! The rest of you get out of here! And you boy why are you still waiting around here? You have the letters and the horse is saddled so get onto the road and gallop! And remember: if you do not keep your word if you lose the letters or confuse the addresses – I will find you and arrange you so that even your own mother will not recognize you!
On my way sir! Incoming!
That day – Ciri pursed her lips – he hit me twice with his fist and belt. Then he lost interest. He just sat there and stared at me silently. His eyes were… something fish-like.
No eyebrows no eyelashes… such aqueous globules each sunk in a black core. He stared at me with those eyes and remained silent. It scared me more than the hitting. I had no idea what he planned.
Vysogota remained silent. Mice ran through the cabin.
He constantly asked me who I was but I said nothing. Like the time when I had been captured in the Pan of the Korath Desert I fled deep into myself if you know what I mean. It was as if I was a doll a wooden puppet and I was numb and dead to everything that happened to this doll. I looked down as if from above. What did it matter if he hit me trampled on me garnished me with a collar like a dog? That was not me. I was not there at all… Do you understand?
I understand Vysogota nodded. I understand Ciri.
This time High Tribunal it was our turn. Our group. Neratin Ceka received our command and Boreas Mun was assigned our tracker. Boreas Mun High Tribunal could find the trail of a fish in water it was said. What a tracker he was! It was said that he once…
The witness should refrain from such digressions.
What? Ah yes… I see. So we saddled the horses and rode to Fano. This was the morning of the sixteenth day of September…
Neratin Ceka and Boreas Mun rode in front behind them – side by side – were Cabernet Turent and Cyprian Fripp following them were Kenna Selborne and Chloe Stitz and in the rear rode Andres Vierny and Dede Vargas. The latter two sang a newly fashionable soldiers song which had been funded and distributed by the War Ministry. Even the animals that lived in the barren wasteland the company travelled through were stung by the songs terribly bitter rhymes and disarming disregard for the basics of grammar. It was titled Yes at the Front and all of the verses – there were over forty – started with those very words.
Yes it happens at the front
That time whoever lost his head
Or on the morrow it turns out
Depends on the giblets you let out
Kenna whistled softly. She was satisfied that she had been able to stay with the good people she had met on the long journey from Aetolia to Rocayne. After speaking with The Owl she had rather expected to be assigned to a random squad such as the group consisting of people from Brigden and Harsheim. Til Echrade had been assigned to such a group but the elf knew most of his new comrades and they knew him.
Although Dacre Silifant had ordered them to ride with all speed they rode at a walk. They were professionals. They galloped and spurted for as long as you could see them from the fort then they slowed down. Crazy riding and galloping was fine for brats and amateurs but haste it is well known is only appropriate if youve caught fleas!
Chloe Stitz the professional thief from Ymlac told Kenna of her previous collaboration with Coroner Stefan Skellen. Cabernet Turent and Fripp the Younger curbed their horses frequently turning around and listening.
I know him well. I have already served under him a couple of times…
Chloe stumbled a little as the double meaning of her own statement occurred to her but she immediately forced an unconcerned smile. Under his command I served very well she blurted out. No Kenna do not worry. It is not mandatory with The Owl. He did not force me – I myself sought and found the opportunity. But to be clear I will tell you that protection is not obtained in this way not with him.
Ive never done anything like that Kenna pursed her lips and looked defiantly into the grinning faces of Turent and Fripp. Im not looking for an opportunity or for protection. I am not so easily intimidated. Especially not by a cock!
Lets not turn this into a cock fight ladies noted Boreas Mun who had reined in his dun stallion waiting for Chloe and Kenna. Let us talk of something else he continued and rode along beside them. Bonhart has no equal with the sword. I would be happy if it turned out there was no dispute or hostility between him and Mr. Skellen – if everything were to be resolved well.
Im not looking forward to fastening my sword belt confessed Andres Vierny from behind. I thought wed be tracking the magician since theyve given us the psionic this here Kenna Selborne. And now were after Bonhart and some girl!
Bonhart the bounty hunter – Boreas Mun cleared his throat – had a contract with Mr. Skellen. And he has broken it. Although he had promised Mr. Skellen that he would kill the girl he left her alive.
Certainly because someone else gave him more money for her alive than The Owl did for her dead Chloe Stitz said shrugging. Thats bounty hunters for you. No trace of honor!
Bonhart was different contradicted Fripp the Younger his face turned backward. It used to be his trademark that he had never broken his word.
All the more strange that he suddenly starts now.
But why? inquired Kenna. Why is this girl so important? Why should she have been killed and why was she not?
What do we care? Boreas Mun grimaced. We have orders! And Mr. Skellen has the right to what is rightfully his. Bonhart should have made Falka cold but he has not done so. Mr. Skellen demands accountability.
This Bonhart repeated Chloe Stitz full of conviction must be getting even more for her alive than for her dead. Thats the whole secret.
That was the Lord Coroners first thought as well said Boreas Mun. Bonhart was hired by one of the Barons of Geso who was terribly angry at the band of Rats and promised a reward to whoever captured Falka alive – so he could slowly torture her to death. But it has been shown that it is not so. We do not know who Bonhart is saving this Falka for but he is certainly not saving her for that Baron.
Mr. Bonhart! The thick Alderman of Jealousy came storming into the inn panting and gasping for air. Mr. Bonhart there are armed men in the village! They came riding in on horses!
Well something like that Bonhart wiped his plate with bread. would be a miracle if they say came riding in on monkey-men. How many?
Four.
And where are my clothes?
Only just washed… not yet dry…
You can all go to the devil. Because Im going to have to welcome the guests in my underpants. Of course such as the guests such as the greeting.
He moved his belt over his underwear strapped on his sword tucked the ends of his pants legs into his boot tops then tightened Ciris collar and pulled on the chain. On your feet little rat.
By the time he brought her out on the porch the four horsemen had already approached the inn. You could tell that they had travelled a long way through the wild – bedrolls dishes and horses were stained with dried mud and dust.
There were four of them but they also led a packhorse. When Ciri saw this packhorse she suddenly became very hot although the day was very cold. It was her white mare still wearing her bridle and saddle. And her headband a gift from Mistle. The mounted horsemen were the same that had killed Hotsporn.
They stopped in front of the inn. One certainly the leader came on riding closer and greeting Bonhart with his marten fur cap. His skin was well-tanned and he wore a black moustache that looked like someone had applied a line on his upper lip with charcoal. Ciri notice that he shrugged his upper lip again and again – a tick that made him look constantly angry. Perhaps he was.
Howdy Mr. Bonhart!
Howdy Mr. Imbra. Hello to you gentlemen. Without haste Bonhart fixed Ciris chain to a hook on the porch. Forgive me for the inexplicable outfit in front of you but I was not expecting you. You have come a long way… Did you drift up here to Ebbing from Geso? And how is the highly esteemed Baron? Is he in good health?
He is flourishing with life the tanned man replied indifferently and then shrugged his upper lip. But we have no time to waste with small talk. Were in a hurry.
Bonhart pulled his belt and underpants. Dont let me delay you.
We heard that youve done in the Rats.
That is true.
And according to the promise that you gave the Baron – the tanned man continued his lip shrugging when he saw Ciri on the porch – you have not killed Falka.
Also I believe true.
So you had all the luck and we had none. The man glanced at the white mare. Oh well. Well take the girl and ride home. Rupert Stavro take her.
Easy Imbra Bonhart raised his hand you will not be taking anyone. For the simple reason that I will not be giving you anyone. Ive changed my mind. Im keeping the girl for my own use.
The tanned man who Bonhart called Imbra leaned over in his saddle coughed and spat impressively far almost to the stairs on the porch. You promised the Baron!
I did. But Ive changed my mind.
What? Did I hear that right?
I do not care Imbra what you heard.
For three days you were entertained in the castle. Because of the promise that you gave the Baron you drank and ate for three days. The best wines from the cellar roasted peacocks venison pies pike in cream. For three nights you slept like a king in a bed of the best down. And now youve changed your mind? Yes?
Bonhart remained silent wearing an indifferent and bored expression.
Imbra gritted his teeth to suppress the twitch of his lip. You realize Bonhart that we could take the Rat from you by force?
Bonharts face until then bored and amused immediately became focused. Try it. You are four I am one. Moreover I am in my underwear. But for you bastards I dont need to wear pants.
Imbra spat again pulled on his reins and turned his horse. Ugh Bonhart whats wrong with you? You were said to be a solid true professional who infallibly kept his word. But now it turns out that your word is worth less than shit! And since you can judge a man according to his word it follows that you yourself are worth…
Be careful Bonhart interrupted the speech in a cold voice resting his hand on his belt buckle that you do not let anything too coarse slip out. Because it will hurt when I return it to you stuffing it down your throat…
You are courageous against four! But do you also have sufficient courage for fourteen? For I can assure you that Baron Casadei will not let this pass!
Id tell you I would come visit your Baron – if it were not for the people around him among them women and children. So instead I tell you that I will remain for about ten days in Claremont. Any who want to take Falka away or take revenge on me are welcome to come to Claremont.
Ill be there!
Ill be waiting. Now get out of here.
They were afraid of him. Monstrously afraid. I could feel the fear that they exuded.
Kelpie whinnied loudly and tossed her head back and forth.
There were four of them armed to the teeth. And he was alone in his underwear and a frayed short-sleeved shirt. It would have been laughable if… if he had not been so terrible.
Vysogota silently closed his eyes which were watering from the wind. They stood on a hill that towered above the marshes of Pereplut near the spot where the old man had found Ciri two weeks ago. The wind bent the reeds and made the water ripple on the flood plains of the river.
One of the four continued Ciri while they allowed the mare to go to the water and drink had a small crossbow on his saddle and his hand crept towards it a bit. I could almost hear his thoughts and feel his dismay. Can I manage to stretch the tendon? To shoot? And what if I am too slow? Bonhart also noticed this crossbow and the hand creeping toward it and even guessed the riders thoughts like I did I am sure. And I am sure that the rider would not have been able to stretch the crossbow.
Kelpie lifted her head and began to neigh her teeth clinking on the bit.
I knew better. I who had fallen into his hands. Though I still did not understand his motives. Their conversation had reminded me of what Hotsporn had said earlier. This Baron Casadei wanted me brought to him alive and Bonhart had promised to do so for him. But now Bonhart was ready to fight him for me. Why? Did he want to deliver me to someone who paid more? Had he somehow found out my secret who I was in truth? And was he about to hand me over to the Nilfgaardians?
We rode out from the settlement that evening. He allowed me to ride Kelpie. But my hands were handcuffed in front of me and he held me all the time with the collar and leash. All the time. We rode almost without stopping all night and all day. I thought I was dying of exhaustion. But somehow he was not tired at all. He was not a man. He was the devil incarnate.
Where did he take you?
To a place called Fano.
When we arrived in Fano High Tribunal it was already dark a darkness where your eyes couldnt even see your head. It was actually only the sixteenth of September but with a night like that – cursed cloudy and cold – one could think it was November. We didnt need to look long to find the workshop of the swordsmith not only because it was the largest estate in the whole town but also because it constantly produced the sound of the hammering of steel. Neratin Ceka… Mr. Writer does not need to write down this name because I dont know if I had already said but Neratin is no longer alive he was killed in a village called One-Horn…
Please do not instruct the minute-taker. Please continue in the statement.
Neratin knocked on the gate. We were asked politely who we were and what we wanted. We asked politely for a hearing. They let us in. The workshop of the swordsmith was a beautiful building as well as a virtual fortress – a palisade of pine beams oak turrets interior walls made of brushed larch-wood…
The court is not interested in architectural details. The witness may come to the point. But first I ask you to repeat the name of the sword smith for the record.
Esterhazy High Tribunal. Esterhazy of Fano.
The swordsmith Esterhazy looked at Boreas Mun for a long time and did not hurry to answer to the question he had been asked.
Maybe Bonhart was here he finally said playing with a bone whistle that hung at his neck. Or maybe he was not? Who knows? Ladies and gentlemen this is a workshop that manufactures swords. For any matters relating to the swords we will gladly give a fast flowing and exhaustively thorough answer. But I see no reason to answer questions related to our guests and customers.
Kenna pulled a handkerchief from her sleeve and acted as if she was brushing her nose.
A reason can be found said Neratin Ceka. You can find it Mr. Esterhazy. Or I can. Would you like to choose? Contrary to Neratins effeminate impression his face could be hard and his voice threatening.
But the swordsmith just snorted as he played with his whistle. Choose between bribery and threats? I would not like to. Both the one and the other are only worthy of spitting on.
Boreas Mun cleared his throat. Just a little information. Is that so much? Weve known each other for some time Mr. Esterhazy and the name of Coroner Skellen is not strange…
It is not interrupted the blacksmith. Not at all. The investigations and actions with which the name is associated are also not strange to me. But here we are in Ebbing a kingdom with its own government and autonomy. Even if only in appearance. Therefore I will tell you nothing. Go on your way. As consolation I promise that if someone should ask about you in a week or a month they will learn nothing from me either.
But Mr. Esterhazy…
Do you want it more clearly? Here you go – Get out of here!
Chloe Stitz hissed angrily Fripps and Vargas hands crawled toward their sword handles and Andres Viernys hand rested on the war hammer hanging at his hip. Neratin Ceka did not move not even his face twitched. Kenna saw him turn an eye to the bone whistle. Before they had entered Boreas Mun had warned them – the sound of the whistle was a signal to call hidden security guards on warhorses who were employed by the factory as quality inspectors.
But Neratin and Boreas had anticipated and planned for all of this. They still had a trump card in reserve.
Kenna Selborne. The psionic.
Kenna had already probed the blacksmith had carefully felt his pulses and had cautiously advanced into the thicket of his thoughts. Now she was ready. With the cloth over her nose – there was always the danger of bleeding – she urged the pulsating imperious will of his mind. Esterhazy began to choke and turned red. He grabbed the top of the table he was sitting at with both hands as if he feared the table would fly away to warmer regions – along with a bundle of bills an inkwell and a paperweight in the shape of a sea nymph holding two tritons.
Quietly ordered Kenna nothing nothing is happening. You just want to tell us what interests us. You know what interests us and you already want to push the words out of you. So go ahead. Go on. Youll see that once you begin to talk there will no longer be sounds in your head pounding at your temples and in your ears until you can no longer stand it. And the convulsion in the cheek will go away.
Bonhart said Esterhazy with a croaking voice lacking the usual syllable articulation was here four days ago on the twelfth of September. He had brought a girl with him which he called Falka. I had expected their visit because two days earlier I had received a letter from him…
A thin line of blood started to run from his left nostril.
Speak ordered Kenna. Speak. Tell me everything. Youll see that it is easier for you.
The swordsmith Esterhazy looked curiously at Ciri without getting up from behind the oak table. For her he guessed as he tapped the barrel of his pen to his paper weight which was a strange figure. The sword that you asked for in your letter is for her. Is that correct Bonhart? Well then lets assess… check to see if this matches with what you wrote. Size is five-foot-nine-inches… Right. Hundred and twelve ounces of weight… Well we could give her less than one hundred and twelve but thats beside the point. A handle have you written to fit a size-five glove… Lets see those hands young lady… Well you were right there.
I always am said Bonhart dryly. Do you have any decent iron for them?
In my business Esterhazy replied proudly we do not offer anything that is made with iron that is not decent. I understand that you require a sword for a fight not for a stroll. Oh yes youve already written that. No question a weapon for this young lady can be easily found. This weight and size of thirty inches fits a standard sword. For the light body and the little hand she needs a mini hybrid with a nine-inch extended handle and ball knob. We could also offer her an Elven-Taldaga or a Zerrikanian Sabre or a Viroledaner…
Show us the goods Esterhazy.
Do we have ants in our pants? Well then we want… we want… hold on Bonhart? What the hell? Why are you leading her on a leash?
Keep your nose to yourself Esterhazy. Dont stick it where it does not belong or else you might lose it!
Esterhazy played with the whistle hanging around his neck and looked at the bounty hunter without fear or respect even though he had to look up sharply.
Bonhart twirled his moustache and cleared his throat. I he said more quietly but still angrily do not interfere in your affairs and interests. Does it surprise you that I expect the same thing from you?
Bonhart – the swordsmith did not quiver or whimper –if you leave my house and my yard if you close my door behind you then I will respect your privacy the confidentiality of your interests and the specificity of your profession. And Im not going to be poking my nose into them you can be sure. However in my house I do not permit human dignity to be violated. Do you understand me? Beyond my door you can drag this little girl behind horses if it suits you. But in my house you will take off that collar. Now.
Bonhart grabbed the collar and loosened it but he did not fail to first jerk it so violently that Ciri nearly fell to her knees.
Esterhazy acted as if he had not seen and let go of the whistle. Thats better he said. Lets go.
They went through a small gallery into another slightly smaller courtyard adjoining the rear of the forge on one side and an orchard on the other. Under a roof supported by carved posts was a table where servants waited ready to design swords. Esterhazy gestured for Bonhart and Ciri to approach the table.
Please this is what I have to offer.
So they went.
Here – Esterhazy pointed at the long series of swords on the table – we have my production mainly all forged here. You can see the horseshoe my blacksmiths mark. Prices range from five to nine florens because the swords are standard. Over here on the other hand we have swords I have only assembled or trimmed. For the most part they are imports. Which you can see by the blacksmith marks. Those hallmarked with crossed hammers are from Mahakam those with the head with a crown or a horse from Poviss and those with a sun from the famous inscription firms of Viroleda. Prices start at ten florens.
And at the end?
It depends. Take for example this beautiful Viroledaner. Esterhazy took the sword from the table saluted it and then went into a fencing position where he moved the hand and forearm in a complicated trick called Moving the Angel. It costs fifteen. An old work and the pommel is a collectors item. One can see that it was made to order. The motif engraved on the vessel indicates that it was intended for a woman. He turned the sword holding it in his hand so that the flat of the blade was visible to them. The traditional inscription describes how to handle a Viroledaner: Not without reason drawn from the sheath not without honor. Ha! In Viroleda such regulations are still engraved. But all over the country such blades are drawn by crooks and fools.
And as the countrys honor has fallen down so has the price because these days hardly anyone wants these goods…
Do not talk so much Esterhazy. Give her the sword she should try it in her hand. Take the weapon girl.
Ciri took the light sword and immediately felt the sure grip in her palm. The weight of the blade melted and invited her arm to cock and to strike.
Its a mini-bastard she unnecessarily explained to Esterhazy. She could deal with the longer handle and three fingers on the ball knob.
Bonhart took two steps back into the yard. He drew his sword from its scabbard and made a dashing cut through the air. Come on! he said to Ciri. Kill me. You have a sword. You have an opportunity. You have a chance. Use it for you will not get a second any time soon.
Have you gone mad?
Shut your mouth Esterhazy.
She deceived him with a sidelong glance misled him with a shrug of the shoulder and then struck like a bolt of lightning from a flat Sinister. The blade struck his parry which was so strong that Ciri faltered and had to jump back bumping her hip against the table with the swords. As she tried to keep her balance she instinctively lowered her sword – they both knew that at this moment if he had wanted to he could easily have killed her.
Have you all gone mad? Esterhazy raised his voice; the whistle was back in the hands of the gnomish-looking man. Servants and workmen looked on stunned.
Put away the iron Bonhart said not looking away from Ciri. He did not pay any attention to the swordsmith at all. Put it away I said. Otherwise I will cut off your hands!
After a moment of brief hesitation she complied.
Bonhart smiled eerily. I know who you are snake. But Ill make you to admit it yourself. With words or with deeds! I will force you to confess who you are. And then Ill kill you.
Esterhazy hissed as if someone wounded him.
And that sword – Bonhart glanced at the piece –is too heavy for you. So you were too slow. You were as slow as a pregnant snail. Esterhazy! What youve given her was at least four ounces too heavy.
The swordsmith was pale. His gaze wandered between her and Bonhart back and forth and he had a strange look on his face. Finally he nodded to a servant and made arrangements in a low voice.
I have something he said slowly that should satisfy you Bonhart.
So why did you not show it to me before? growled the bounty hunter. I wrote that I wanted something exquisite. Did you think perhaps that I could not afford a better sword?
I know what you can afford Esterhazy said emphatically. I learned it only a moment ago. And why I did not show it to you before? I could not know who you would bring me… leashed and collared. I could not imagine for whom the sword was for or for what purpose it was intended. Now I know everything.
The servant came back carrying an elongated display case.
Come here girl Esterhazy said quietly. Look.
Ciri approached. She looked. And sighed loudly.
She drew the sword with a rapid movement. The light of the fireplace shone red and sparkled brilliantly on the wavy edge of the blade.
This is it said Ciri. What do you think? Of course you can take it in your hand if you want. But beware it is sharper than a razor. Do you feel how the handle sticks to the palm? Its made from the skin of a flat fish which has a poisonous sting in its tail.
A ray.
Maybe. This fish has very small teeth on its skin so the handle does not slip out of your hand even when you sweat. Look at what is etched on the blade.
Vysogota leaned forward and looked down with his eyes screwed together in concentration.
An Elven Mandala he said after a while and looked up. A so-called Blathan Caerme a sign of destiny: the stylized flowers of oak spiraea and goat clover. The lightning struck tower is a symbol in the elder races of chaos and destruction… And on the tower…
A swallow concluded Ciri. Zireael. My name.
Indeed not bad said Bonhart eventually. A Gnomish weapon – that can be seen immediately. Only the gnomes have forged such dark iron. Only the gnomes have sharpened flame-shaped blades and only the gnomes have broken through the welds to reduce the weight… Admit it Esterhazy. Is this an imitation?
No said the blacksmith. An original. A real Gnomish-Gwyhyr. The knob is about two hundred years old. This version is of course much younger but I would not call it an imitation. The gnomes of Tir Tochair made it on my order. According to the ancient techniques methods and patterns.
Damn it. I actually might not be able to afford this sword. How much do you want for it?
Esterhazy was silent for a while. His expression was inscrutable. I ask nothing Bonhart he finally said flatly. It is a gift. In order to fulfil what must be fulfilled.
Thanks replied Bonhart visibly surprised. Thank you Esterhazy. A royal gift truly regal… I guess so yes. And I am in your debt.
You are not. The sword is for her not for you. Come here girl with the collar. Look at the characters etched into the blade. You do not understand them thats obvious. But Ill tell you. Look. The pre-drawn line of fate is crooked but it leads to the tower here. To ruin to the destruction of the existing values ​​of the existing order. And here on the tower you see? One swallow. The symbol of hope. Take this sword. May it fulfil what must be fulfilled.
Ciri gently stretched out her hand and gently stroked the dark blade with edges like a shiny mirror.
Take it Esterhazy said slowly looking at Ciri with wide-open eyes. Take it. Take it in your hand girl. Take…
No Bonhart suddenly yelled. He jumped up grabbed Ciris shoulder and pushed her aside with a vengeance. Away!
Ciri fell to her knees and the gravel in the yard stuck painfully into her palms.
Bonhart slammed the box. Not yet he growled. Not today! You are not yet ready.
Obviously Esterhazy agreed with him and looked into his eyes. Yes it is obvious she is not yet ready. Too bad.
There wasnt much useful information in the mind of the swordsmith High Tribunal. We were there on the sixteenth of September three days before full moon. But on our way back from Fano to Rocayne we met up with a mounted Ola Harsheim leading seven men – all that remained of the division. Because the day before on the fifteenth of September there had been a massacre in Claremont… of this I probably do not have to talk since the High Tribunal surely knows about the massacre in Claremont…
Please testify without worrying about what the Tribunal knows.
Bonhart had anticipated us by a day. On the fifteenth of September he had brought Falka to Claremont…
Claremont repeated Vysogota. I know that town. Where did he take you?
To a large house on the market square. With columns and arches at the entrance. You could see right away that a rich man lived there…
The rooms walls were covered with rich tapestries and extremely ornate wall hangings representing and depicting scenes from religion hunting and rural life that involved women. The furniture shone with inlaid brass fittings and the carpets were such that the foot sank to the ankle when one walked through them. But Ciri did not have time to notice these details because Bonhart walked through the room quickly pulling her chain.
Hail Houvenaghel.
Rainbow-colored light fell through a glass window and shone against a tapestry of hunting scenes. In front of the tapestry stood a massive imposing man dressed in a gold-embroidered jacket and a long fur tunic. Although in the prime of his manhood he was bald and his cheeks hung down like a bulldogs.
Hail Leo he said. And you Miss…
The young lady Bonhart pointed to the chain and collar does not have to be greeted.
Politeness costs nothing.
Save your time. Bonhart pulled the chain approached the man and slapped the fat on his abdomen without further ado. You have gained a great deal of weight he said. Really Houvenaghel it would be easier to jump over you than to go around you if you stood in the way.
The good life. Houvenaghel said jovially and shook his cheeks. Hail Leo welcome. You are a welcome guest because I have ample reason to celebrate today. Business is going so amazingly well that you almost want to knock on wood – the cashier rings on and on! Only today to give you an example fresh in my mind I had a Nilfgaardian Captain of the Reserve a quartermaster sell me an equipment shipment from the front – six thousand warrior bows. I can charge ten times what I paid him by selling the bows to hunters poachers thieves elves and other freedom fighters. I also bought a castle at an inexpensive price from a local Marquis…
What the hell are you doing with a castle?
I must live representatively. Again business is going well. There is one thing I actually owe to you. A seemingly hopeless debtor has paid. Literally a moment ago. His hands were shaking as he paid. The fellow had seen you and thought…
I know what he thought. Did you receive my letter?
Yes. Houvenaghel sat down heavily hitting his stomach against the table so that the decanters and goblets clinked. And Ive prepared everything. Have you not seen the odds? She has certainly fulfilled the promise of drawing a crowd… People are already at the arena. The cash register is ringing… Sit down Leo. We have time. Let us talk have some wine…
I do not want your wine. Which has certainly been stolen from one of the Nilfgaardian transports.
You must be kidding. This is an Est Est Toussaint and the grapes were prepared when our gracious Emperor Emhyr was a little kid shitting in his little duvet diaper. A good year for wines… To your health Leo.
Bonhart silently saluted with his cup.
Houvenaghel began to cluck as he looked out over Ciri critically. So this is the wide-eyed fawn he said finally that the letter promised would guarantee entertainment? Ive heard that Windsor Imbra is in town. And also that he has a few cutthroats with him…
Have my goods ever disappointed you Houvenaghel?
No thats right. But I also have had nothing from you for a long time.
I work less often than I used to. I am looking for an opportunity to retire completely.
This requires capital to accomplish. I might know of a possibility… Want to hear it?
In the absence of other distractions. Bonhart shifted and swung his leg up on a chair forcing Ciri to sit down.
Have you ever thought about leaving for the north? Up to Cintra or on the North Case of the Yaruga? Did you know that anyone who drags themselves up there and settles in the conquered areas is guaranteed an allocation of four hides of land by the Empire? And ten years tax exemption?
I the bounty hunter replied calmly do not want to own a farm. I could not dig in the earth or breed cattle. Im too sensitive. At the sight of an earthworm or shit I throw up.
Just like me. Houvenaghel wobbled his jaw. On the whole I still only tolerate illicit agriculture. The rest is repulsive. They say agriculture is the backbone of the economy and guarantees prosperity. I consider it to be unworthy and degrading to imply that my wealth is reliant on something that smells like dung. I have taken efforts in this respect. There is no obligation to till the land or keep cattle. Its enough to have it. If you develop it accordingly you can collect a decent lease. You can believe me it really is enough to live off. Yes I have taken some efforts in this respect so my question regarding a trip to the north still stands. Because you see Bonhart I have a job for you there. A permanent well-paying job which will be easy for you. And it is right up your alley: no shit no worms.
Im willing to listen. Without obligations of course.
With a bit of entrepreneurial spirit and a low initial capital investment one can put together some pretty decent large-scale plantations from the land-lots the Emperor gives to the settlers.
I understand. The bounty hunter bit his moustache. I understand where youre going. I know what efforts you undertake in respect to your prosperity. You reckon there will be no difficulties?
Yes but with two exceptions. First we need to find people to hire to masquerade as settlers in the north and receive the land-lots. Pro forma for themselves de facto for me. But since I am dealing with that the only other difficulty concerns you.
Im all ears.
Some of the settlers will take the land-lots and have no desire to part with them. They will forget about the contract they have with me and the money that they have received from me. You would not believe how deeply dishonesty heartlessness and rotten behavior are anchored in human nature.
I believe it.
They must be convinced that dishonesty is not worthwhile. That they will be punished. That is where you come in.
Sounds good.
It is what it sounds like. Ive already made a practice rotation. After the formal inclusion of Ebbing into the Empire the land-lots were distributed. And later when the law on collection in the city came into force. Such is Claremont this pretty little town on my land so it belongs to me. This whole area belongs to me. Up there with blue-gray haze shrouded by the horizon. Thats all mine. Whole hundred and fifty hides. Imperial hides no farm-allotments. Thats nearly ten thousand yoke. Or eighteen thousand nine hundred general units.
Oh lawless realm the near demise recited Bonhart ironically. Fall the Empire must steal it all. In self-interest and selfishness is its weakness.
Therein lies its power and strength. Houvenaghel wobbled. You Bonhart confuse theft with individual entrepreneurial spirit.
All too often the bounty hunter admitted calmly.
So what of our partnership?
Arent we dividing up the land in the north a bit too early? Shouldnt we play it safe and wait until Nilfgaard has won this war?
Play it safe? Do not make jokes. The outcome of the war is predetermined. Wars are won with money. The Empire has what the North does not.
Since were talking about money…
Its done. Houvenaghel rummaged in the documents on the table. Here is a bank bill for one hundred florens. Here the contract for the transfer of receivables from the Varnhagens of Geso to myself based on the reward for the heads of the bandits. Please sign here. Thank you. A percentage of the revenues of the idea are for you but invoices have not been completed the cash register is still ringing. There is great interest in her Leo. Very great. The people in my town suffer horribly from boredom and gloom. He paused and glanced at Ciri. I sincerely hope that you are not mistaken in regards to this person. That she provides decent entertainment… That she cooperates in the common interest of the profits…
For her – Bonhart looked at Ciri indifferently – there is no profit here. You know that.
Houvenaghel frowned and looked indignant. It is bad hell for her to know that! You should not have told her! Whats wrong with you Leo? And if she does not want to be entertaining if she proves to be unreliable and malicious? What then?
Bonhart did not change his facial expression. Then he said we leave her in the arena and let your bulldogs at her. They were as I recall always reliable and entertaining.
Ciri was silent for a long time rubbing her disfigured cheek.
I began to understand she said finally. I began to understand what they wanted to do with me. I tensed myself determined to flee at the first opportunity… regardless of the risk. But they gave me no chance. They guarded me well. Vysogota remained silent.
They dragged me downstairs. Guests of this thick Houvenaghel were waiting there. Again nothing but eccentrics! Where in the world do so many strange oddities come from Vysogota?
You multiply. Natural selection.
The first of the men was so short and stocky he looked more like a halfling than a human being. And he was even dressed like a halfling – humble nice neat and in pastel shades. The other man though elderly had the clothing and stature of a soldier. He wore a sword and on the shoulders of his black jacket flashed a silver brooch depicting a dragon with bat wings. The woman was light-haired and thin had a slightly hooked nose and thin lips. Her pistachio-colored dress had a very low neckline. This was not a particularly good idea. There was not much cleavage to show aside from wrinkled and dried skin like parchment which was covered with a thick layer of rouge and Blanche.
The highborn Marquise de-Nementh Uyvar presented Houvenaghel. Mr. Declan aep Maelchlad Ros Captain of the Reserve of his Imperial Majesty the Emperor of Nilfgaard. Mr. Pennycuick Mayor of Claremont. And this is Mr. Leo Bonhart my cousin and longtime comrade-in-arms.
Bonhart bowed stiffly.
So this is the little bandit who should entertain us today said the Marquise with her thin and pale blue eyes fixed on Ciri. Her voice sounded hoarse horribly hung-over and appalling. It vibrated lasciviously. Not very nice Id say. But not badly built… I assume its a very nice… body.
Ciri jerked around and pushed away the Marquises outstretched hand full of rage and hissing like a snake.
Please do not touch Bonhart said coldly. Do not feed. Do not irritate. I assume no responsibility if you do not obey my warnings.
The body – the Marquise licked her lips ignoring him – can always be tied to the bed then it is more accessible. Would you drain me of my fun Mr. Bonhart? My Marquis and I love these kinds of bodies but the Lord Houvenaghel reproaches us if we take the local shepherdesses and peasant children. The Marquis has no way to hunt for little children anymore. He cannot run fast because of the chancres and condylomata that flare up in him when he runs…
Enough enough Mathilda Houvenaghel said gently but quickly when he saw the disgusted expression on Bonharts face. We must go to the arena. The Lord Mayor has just reported that Windsor Imbra has arrived in the city with a detachment of servants of the Baron Casadei. So its time for us to go.
Bonhart pulled a small bottle from his pocket wiped his sleeve across the onyx plate of a little table and poured a tiny mound of white powder on it. He pulled the chain attached to Ciris collar.
You know how to use it?
Ciri clenched her teeth.
Take it through your nose. Or spit and wet your finger then rub it into your gums.
No!
Bonhart did not even turn his head. Either you will do it he said softly or I will do it but in a way that all attendees have their fun. You do not only have mucous membranes in the mouth and nose little rat. Also a few other weird places. Ill call servants have them hold you and make use of the weird places.
The Marquise de-Nementh Uyvar gave a throaty laugh and looked on as Ciri reached for the narcotic with trembling hands.
Weird places she said licking her lips. An interesting idea. Ill have to try that sometime! H-hey girl be careful do not spill good Fisstech! Leave me a little bit!
The narcotic was much stronger than the one she had tried with the Rats. A few moments after taking it Ciri was hit by a blinding euphoria figures were given sharper contours light and colors stabbed her eyes smells tempted her nose noises were unbearably loud and everything was surreal fleeting as if figments of a dream. There were the stairs there were smelly dusty tapestries and wall hangings there was the raucous laughter of the Marquise de-Nementh Uyvar. There was the courtyard there were the fast rain drops on her face the jerking on the collar which she still wore. A huge building with a wooden tower and a large repulsive garish painting on the front. The painting depicted a dog that was biting a monster – a dragon a griffin or perhaps a wyvern. Many people waited outside the entrance to the building. One of them shouted and gesticulated.
This is disgusting! Disgusting and sinful Mr. Houvenaghel! A former temple used for such godless inhumane and abhorrent proceedings! Animals also feel Mr. Houvenaghel! They also have their dignity! It is a crime to pit them against one another for profit and the delight of the mob!
Calm yourself saintly man! And do not interfere with a private enterprise! And anyway there will be no animals set on each other today. Not a single animal! Only human beings!
Well then accept my apologies.
The interior of the building was full of people sitting on benches which formed an amphitheater. In the center there was a pit dug in the ground a circular depression about thirty feet in diameter supported by rough beams and walls surrounded by a balustrade. The stench and the noise were overwhelming. Ciri again felt a tug on the collar then someone grabbed her under the armpits and then someone gave her a shove. Suddenly she found herself at the bottom of the pit falling down on sand.
In the arena.
The abrupt initial reaction was over now the narcotic only lifted her mood and sharpened her senses. Ciri held her ears – on the benches of the amphitheater the clamoring teeming crowd went wild and whistled. The noise was unbearable. She noticed strong leather armor stretched around her right wrist and forearm offering some protection. She could not recall when that had been put on her.
She heard the familiar hung-over voice saw the thin pistachio-green Marquise the Nilfgaard Captain the pastel-hued mayor Houvenaghel and Bonhart taking a towering box above the arena. She uncovered her ears just as someone suddenly struck a metal gong.
Look people! Today in the arena we have no wolf no goblin no endrega! Today in the arena we have the murderess Falka from the gang of Rats! Taking bets at the box office near the entrance! Be generous with the pennies folks!
Its the best diversion you cannot eat or drink – whoever saves money here does nothing but lose out!
The crowd roared and clapped. The narcotic worked. Ciri trembled with euphoria and her senses registered everything every detail. She heard the roaring laughter of Houvenaghel the hung-over giggling of the Marquise Bonharts cold bass voice the cry of the priest who had defended the animals the shrieking of women and the crying of children. She saw the dark blood stains on the beams that surrounded the arena and the gaping barred stinking hole outside of it. She saw the sweat-shiny brutally distorted visages over the balustrade.
Sudden movement raised voices curses. Weapons hailed and pushed through the crowd but stopped as they met with a wall of partisan armed guards. She had seen one of these people before she remembered the tanned face and the line of a black moustache that looked like it had been applied with charcoal on a nervous twitching upper lip.
Mr. Windsor Imbra? said the voice of Houvenaghel. From Geso? The Seneschal of the high-born Baron Casadei? Welcome welcome our foreign guests. Take your seats at once the spectacle will begin soon. But please do not forget to pay at the door!
Im not here for pleasure Mr. Houvenaghel! Im here on official business! Bonhart knows of what I speak!
Really? Leo? Do you know what the Lord Seneschal is talking about?
No jokes! I have fifteen men with me! We want Falka! Give her to us otherwise therell be trouble!
I do not understand why you are so upset Imbra. Houvenaghel frowned. But I would like to point out to you that this is not Geso and not the country of your Lord Baron. If you cry or make trouble then Ill have you chased off with bull whips.
No offense Mr. Houvenaghel! Windsor Imbra relented. But the law is on our side! Bonhart has promised Falka to the Baron Casadei. He has given his word. Let him see what comes of commitment and obligation!
Leo? Houvenaghel wobbled his cheeks. Do you know what hes talking about?
I know and agree with him. Bonhart stood up and waved his hand dismissively. Im not going to oppose or raise objections. The girl is there where you can all see her. Whoever wants her can take her.
Windsor Imbra looked stunned. His lips twitched violently. How?
The girl repeated Bonhart and winked at Houvenaghel is there for anyone who wants to take her out of the arena. Dead or alive at your leisure.
How?
Damn I gradually lose my patience! Bonhart yelled in fake anger. How like nothing like! You damned organ grinder! How? However you want! If it fits you then throw her out poisoned meat as you would a wolf. But I do not know if she will eat it. She does not look stupid right? No Imbra. Whoever wants to get her must take the trouble themselves. There in the arena. You want Falka? Take her!
You think to dangle this Falka under my nose like a frog on a hook with a catfish growled Imbra Windsor. I do not trust you Bonhart. I smell it. There is in an iron hook in the bait!
You can congratulate the good weather for the iron hook. Bonhart said as he stood and pulled the sword from Fano from under his bench. He drew it from its scabbard and threw it into the arena so cleverly that the blade drilled vertically into the sand two steps away from Ciri. Because without it the iron hook wouldnt be here. Clearly visible not hidden. For I put no value on this woman whoever wants to take her can take her. If he can.
The Marquise de-Nementh Uyvar laughed nervously. If he can she repeated with her contralto hung-over voice. Because now that pretty little body has a sword. Bravo Mr. Bonhart. I disliked the idea of these hoodlums accosting and devouring her defenseless body.
Mr. Houvenaghel. Imbra Windsor stood with his hands on his hips without even appreciating the thin aristocrat admiring him. This show takes place under your auspices for the arena belongs to you. Tell me what rules should we play by here your own or those of Bonhart?
The rules of the arenas laughter and cheers Houvenaghel replied as his stomach and bulldog jaw waggled. For while it is true that the arena belongs to me our king is the customer who pays who provides the financial support! The customer makes the rules. And we the merchants have to abide by these rules: what the customer wants he must get.
The customer? That is these people? Windsor Imbra pointed with a sweeping gesture to the full bench seats. All these people have come and have paid to see a spectacle?
Business is business said Houvenaghel. If there is demand for something why not sell it? People pay for a wolf fight? And for fighting between an endrega and an aardvark? For dogs hunting rabbits in a field? Why are you surprised Imbra? The people want games and spectacles as much as their daily bread – from what I can tell perhaps even more. Many of those who have come here today have saved some from their mouths. But look how their eyes shine. They cant wait to see how the show starts.
But for all of that added Bonhart with a venomous smile at least a semblance of sportiness must be maintained. And now the girl has a blade. What do you think good people? Am I right?
The good people confirmed confusedly but just as loudly and joyously as Bonhart had anticipated.
The Baron Casadei said Windsor Imbra slowly will not like this Mr. Houvenaghel. I tell you it will not please him. I do not know if its worthwhile for us to start with her armed.
Business is business repeated Houvenaghel and waggled his jaws. Baron Casadei knows this well – he has borrowed a lot of money from me at low interest rates and when he comes to borrow more then we will settle our dispute somehow. But no foreign Baron will interfere in my private and individual corporate activities. Bets have already been placed and people have already paid admission. Blood must seep into this sand here in the arena.
Must? roared Windsor Imbra. Like shit it must! Id very much like to show you that nothing must seep in your arena! I could just turn around and ride away not even looking back at you. Then you can seep your own blood here! The thought that I would be working for the amusement of this rabble sickens me!
Let him go someone suddenly said from the crowd an overgrown guy in a leather jacket made of horse hides. Let him go if he is sick. I will not mind. Because it was said that whoever gets the Rat gets the reward. I will go into the arena.
No! Out of the question cried one of Imbras people a not-particularly-large but sinewy and powerfully-built man. His hair was thick tangled and matted into dreadlocks. We were here first! Isnt that right boys?
We sure were! agreed a second of Imbras men who was thin and wore a goatee. We have the first turn! And you should not be so sensitive about your reputation Windsor! The rabble looks on so what? Falka is in the arena and we need only to reach out and take her. So what if the mob makes goggle eyes we do not care!
And what else can we do! screamed a third who wore a doublet of lively amaranth. It should be sporting really shouldnt it Mr. Houvenaghel? This is the right place for a spectacle then! And there was talk of a reward!
Houvenaghel smiled broadly and nodded affirmatively proudly and majestically all the while his cheeks wobbled.
And what asked Goatee are the odds?
For now the businessman said smiling they are still not set on the outcome of the struggle! For now it is three-to-one that not one of you will venture into the arena.
Phuuu! roared Horsehide. Ill wager it! Im ready!
Piss off! Dreadlocks shouted back. We were here first and have the first turn. Cmon what are we waiting for?
As many as we can fit in the arena? Amaranth adjusted his belt. Or separate?
Oh you sons of bitches! shouted the pastel-hued Mayor – quite unexpectedly and with a voice like an ox which did not suit his stature. Perhaps you would like to go ten against one? Perhaps you would like to be mounted? Perhaps a chariot? Perhaps you should check out the armory and ask if you can borrow a catapult so you can throw rocks on the girl from a distance? Well?
Okay okay interrupted Bonhart who had been consulting with Houvenaghel quickly. It should be sporting but it should also be fun. You can compete for two. As a pair that is to say.
But the reward Houvenaghel warned will not be doubled! If youre a pair you have to share.
Why as a pair? Why two? Dreadlocks tossed his hair from his shoulders with a violent movement. Are you not ashamed guys? Thats just a girl! Ugh! Stand back. Ill go in there myself. What should I do to her?
I want Falka alive! protested Windsor Imbra. To hell with your struggles and duels! I do not care about Bonharts spectacle I want that girl! Alive! You go in a pair you and Stavro. And get her out of there.
For me repeated Stavro who was the man with the goatee it is an affront to go against such a skinny thing as a pair.
The Baron will sweeten this affront with a floren. But only if you take her alive!
So the Baron is a miser. Houvenaghel laughed out loud his belly and bulldog jaw trembling. He does not have the sporting spirit and does not offer a worthwhile reward! I however support the sport. And therefore I increase the reward. Anyone who goes into the arena alone and leaves on their own feet again – I will pay with this hand here from this bag here not twenty but thirty florens.
What are we waiting for? screamed Stavro. I go first!
Hold on cried the little Mayor again in a voice of thunder. The girl has only a thin cloth on her back! So you also pull off your leather armor soldier. Its sporty!
Get yourselves the plague! Stavro threw off his iron-studded jacket and pulled his shirt over his head and shoulders. He was bare-chested stick-thin and hairy. Get yourselves the plague gentlemen along with your shitty sports! So Ill go with bare skin! Oh! Should I take off my pants too?
Pull the trousers off! croaked the Marquise de-Nementh Uyvar lasciviously. Then we will see if youre a man with more than your mouth!
Rewarded with thunderous applause the naked-to-the-waist Stavro approached the arena and threw one leg over the bars of the barrier carefully keeping Ciri in view. Ciri crossed her hands over her chest. She did not even step out to the sword spitted in the sand. Stavro hesitated.
Do not do it Ciri said very quietly. Do not make me… You will not touch me.
No offense kid. Stavro jumped over the barrier. I have nothing against you. But business is business…
He did not finish because Ciri was already with him she already held Swallow – so she called the gnomish Gwyhyr in her mind. She used a simple almost certain-to-fail ruse called Three Little Steps – but Stavro fell for it. He took a step backwards and instinctively raised his sword and already he was at her mercy – he stood with his back against the bars surrounding the arena and looked at the tip of Swallow which was an inch from his nose.
That trick explained Bonhart to the Marquise over the shouts and cheers of screaming is called Three Little Steps Feint and Failure. A cheap number I had expected something more sophisticated from the girl. But you must admit – if she wanted the guy would not even be alive.
Kill him! Kill him! shouted the crowd while showing the mayor and Houvenaghel their hands with thumbs pointed down. The blood drained from Stavros face making ugly pimples and pockmarks stand out on his cheeks.
I told you not force me hissed Ciri. I do not want to kill you! But you will not touch me. Go back where you came from.
She stepped back turned around lowered her sword and looked up at the stands. You play with me? she exclaimed in a broken voice. You want to force me to fight? To kill? Youre not forcing me. I will not fight!
Did you hear Imbra? Bonharts mocking voice resounded in the silence. Pure profit! And no risk! She will not fight. You can go in take her out of the arena alive and take her to Baron Casadei so he is happy with you. You can take her without risk! With your bare hands!
Windsor Imbra spat. Stavro his back pressed to the bars still in the chamber breathed hard and frantically gripped the sword in his hand.
Bonhart smiled. But Imbra Ill bet diamonds to nuts that you will not prosper.
Stavro exhaled heavily. It seemed that the girl who stood with her back to him was distracted unfocused. He roared with rage shame and hatred. He could not stand it. He attacked. Quickly and treacherously.
The audience did not see how she dodged and struck back. It just looked like Stavro fell on Falka and then suddenly sprang up like a ballet dancer – he even did a kind of little ballet forward into the sand which was instantly filled with blood.
Instincts will prevail! cried Bonhart over the crowd. The reflexes work! What did I tell you Houvenaghel? You will see that the bulldogs will not be necessary!
What a beautiful and profitable drama Houvenaghel said with delight in his eyes.
Stavro rose to his arms trembling with the effort threw his head back and forth cried gasped spat blood and fell back on the sand.
What was this blow Mr. Bonhart? The Marquise de-Nementh Uyvar croaked while lustfully rubbing her knees together.
That was an improvisation. Under the lips that answered the Marquises question teeth flashed. A beautiful creative and one could say almost visceral improvisation. Ive heard of a place where they teach such improvised abdominal strikes. I bet that our young lady knows this place. I know who she is.
Force me not cried Ciri in a truly spooky tone. I will not! Do you hear me? I will not!
This woman comes from hell! Amaranth cleverly jumped over the barrier and immediately circled the arena to distract Ciri from noticing Dreadlocks who also jumped into the pit. Horsehide jumped across the barrier after Dreadlocks.
Unfair play! cried the Mayor Pennycuick and the crowd alongside him. Three against one! Unfair play!
Bonhart smiled. The Marquise licked her lips and began to move her legs more violently back and forth.
The plan of the three was simple – force the little girl to retreat against the bar and then two would block her while the third killed her. Nothing came of it. For one simple reason. The girl did not retreat but attacked.
She slid a pirouette dance between them so fluid that she barely touched the sand. She hit Dreadlocks in passing and he fell down right there. She had hit him at the carotid artery. The blow was so light that she did not even lose her rhythm she was so elegant and so quick that the opposite rotation was over before a single drop of blood had splashed from the newly elongated neck of Dreadlocks. Amaranth who was behind her wanted to beat her in the neck but the treacherous blow hit a parry on the back of the curved sword. Ciri turned off sprung and struck a blow with both hands which was reinforced with a sharp hip flexion to give it even more power. The dark Gnome blade was like a razor she slit open his hissing and smacking stomach. Amaranth howled and fell huddled in the sand. Horsehide approached and jumped trying to cut the little girls throat. She fell but with a twist. She turned fluently and gave him a short cut with the middle of the blade to split his face eye nose mouth and chin.
The audience roared whistled stomped and howled. The Marquise de-Nementh Uyvar put both hands between her clenched legs licked her glossy lips and laughed in a nervous contralto. The Nilfgaardian Captain of the Reserve was as pale as vellum paper. A woman was trying to cover her childs eyes with her hands – he was trying to break free. A gray-haired old grandfather in the front row threw up violently and noisily his head down between his knees.
Horsehide sobbed with his hands on the face. From under his fingers oozed blood mixed with mucus and saliva. Amaranth was rolling and squealing like a pig. Dreadlocks was trying to claw his way over the bars which were slippery with the blood that spurted out of him to the beat of his heart.
 wailed Amaranth while frantically trying to hold in his bulging viscera.
Horsehide spat and vomited blood.
KILL-THEM! KILL-THEM! chanted the crowd and stomped to the beat. The old man who had vomited pushed off his bench and kicked at the balcony.
Diamonds to nuts came Bonharts mocking bass amidst the bustle that no one dares to go into the arena anymore. Diamonds to nuts Imbra! Oh what am I saying – even diamonds to numb nuts!
KILL-THEM! Roaring stomping clapping. KILL-THEM!
Miss! Windsor Imbra shouted and waved at his subordinates. Let us gather the wounded! Let us come into the arena and carry them away before they bleed and die! Be a man young lady!
A man Ciri repeated as she felt adrenaline bubble up within her. She quickly dominated it by exhaling several times as she had been taught.
Come in and get them she said. But come without weapons. You too are human. At least this once.
NO yelled and chanted the crowd. KILL! KILL!
You vile beasts! Ciri turned and let her soft eyes wander over the bleachers and benches. You unappreciative pigs! You rascals! You mangy bastards! You want blood? Come on come on down – taste it and smell it! Lick it before it dries up! Brutes! Vampires!
The Marquise moaned began to tremble rolled her eyes and leaned softly on Bonhart without taking her hand from between her thighs. Bonhart frowned and pushed her away trying not to feel tactless. The crowd howled. Someone threw a half-eaten sausage in the arena another one threw a boot and then someone even threw a cucumber at Ciri. She cut the cucumber through the middle with her sword which was greeted with even greater outcry.
Windsor Imbra and his men lifted Amaranth and Horsehide. When they moved Amaranth he began to roar. Horsehide however fainted. Dreadlocks and Stavro no longer showed any signs of life. Ciri withdrew herself as far as possible as far as the arena allowed. Imbras people also strove to keep their distance.
Imbra Windsor stood motionless. He looked at Ciri from under lowered eyelids but his hand was on the handle of the sword he had promised not to draw when he had entered the arena.
No she warned him almost without moving her lips. I do not want to. Please.
Imbra was pale. The crowd stomped roared and howled.
Do not listen to her shouted Bonhart over the noise. Draw your sword! Or else show the world that youre a coward and a pants-pisser! From Alba to the Yaruga people will hear that Windsor Imbra ran away from an underage girl – like a dog with his tail between his legs!
Imbras blade slid an inch from its sheath. No said Ciri. The blade slid back.
Coward! shouted someone from the crowd. Coward! Chicken shit!
With a stony face Imbra approached the edge of the arena. Down in front of him were the outstretched hands of his comrades that had attacked her. He looked back once.
You probably already know what awaits you girl he said quietly. You probably already know who Leo Bonhart is. You probably already know what Leo Bonhart is capable of. What excites him. More will come to face you in the arena. Youll kill for the pleasure of pigs and rags like those here. And even worse. And if it does not entertain them when you kill or if Bonhart grows bored of the violence perpetrated by you then he will kill you. He will send so many into the arena that you wont be able to cover your back. He will rush you or send dogs. The dogs will tear you apart the mob will smell blood and applaud and you will bleed out on the dirty sand. Just as you have done to these ones today. Think on my words.
Strangely only now did she notice the little pin on his enameled collar.
An upturned silver unicorn in a black box.
A unicorn.
Ciri lowered her head. She looked at the sword blade.
Suddenly it became very quiet.
By the Great Sun suddenly cried Declan Ros aep Maelchlad the Nilfgaardian Captain of the Reserve who had hitherto been silent. No. Do not do that girl. Ne tuven quess Luned!
Ciri swallowed and slowly turned her hand around resting the hilt on the sand. She bent her knees. With her right hand holding the blade the tip was aimed precisely under her left breastbone. The blade pierced through her clothing.
Just do not start to cry thought Ciri as she pressed more strongly against the sword. Just do not cry theres nothing I would need or want to cry about. A violent movement and its all over…
You cannot do it Bonharts voice was heard in the perfect silence. You cannot do it witcheress. In Kaer Morhen they taught you to kill so you kill like a machine. Instinctively. To kill yourself takes character strength determination and courage. But that they could not teach you.
As you see he was right admitted Ciri with difficulty. I have not managed to.
Vysogota was silent. He held a muskrat pelt. Motionless. He had been sitting so for a long time. He had almost forgotten that pelt existed.
I chickened out. I was a coward. And Ive paid for it. Like any coward pays. With pain shame and disgusting submission. And terrible self-loathing…
Vysogota remained silent.
If someone had managed to sneak at night to the cabin with a sagging thatch roof and if they had peeked through a crack in the shutters they would have seen in the dimly-lit interior a gray-bearded old man and an ash-blonde girl sitting by a fireplace. They would have noticed that both were silently gazing at the glowing ruby-red coals.
But no one could see that. The hut with the mossy thatch roof was well-hidden in the fog and the haze amid boundless reeds in the marshes of Pereplut where no one dared enter.
Whoever sheds the blood of man by man shall his blood be shed.
CHAPTER FIVE
What does a witcher want in my area? repeated Fulk Artevelde the governor of Riedbrune already visibly impatient with the continuing silence. Where does the witcher come from? What is he looking for? For what purpose?
Thus ends the pleasure received from doing good deeds thought Geralt as he stared at the face of the governor thickened with scars. It ends when you play the merciful noble witcher for a mob of filthy hillbillies. Thus the desire for luxury leads to spending the night in an inn where there is always a spy. These are the consequences of travelling with a gossip-addicted poet. So now Im sitting in a cell reminiscent of a room without windows on a hard chair which is mounted to the floor for interrogation and I cannot help but notice that there are brackets and straps on the back of this chair. To tie the hands and secure the neck. For now they arent being used. But they are there.
And how the devil am I going to wriggle out of this predicament?
When they finally emerged from the drenched wilderness after five days of travelling with the bee keeper from the river country it stopped raining – the wind blew apart the fog and the damp mist. The sun broke through the clouds and snow-white mountain peaks sparkled in the sunlight.
Not long ago the Yaruga River had felt like a significant turning point a boundary beyond which was the obvious transition to the next more serious stage of the expedition. They felt it even more so now that they were approaching a limit a barrier a place from which retreat seemed their only option. Everyone felt it especially Geralt. It could not be helped because from morning to night the mighty jagged snow and glacier covered mountains flashed before them to the south blocking their way. The Amell Mountains. Above the unforgiving mountain range rose the majestic threatening shape of the Gorgon – the Devils Mountain. It towered above the saw-toothed contour of the Amell Range like the blade of a sharp-edged obelisk. They did not talk about it did not discuss it but Geralt knew everyone was thinking about it. For when he looked at the Amell Range and the Gorgon it occurred to him that the idea of marching further south was pure madness.
Luckily it suddenly turned out they had no further need to travel south.
The news was brought to them by the shaggy-haired bee keeper. The leader of their trek through the wilderness for whom they had been acting as armed escorts for the last five days. The husband and father of the beautiful hamadryads in whose company he looked like a wild boar alongside mares. The liar who had tried to convince them that the Druids had migrated to the North Case.
It happened one day after their arrival in the small town of Riedbrune the destination of bee keepers and trappers of the river country which was as busy as an anthill. It happened one day after they had taken their leave of the bee keeper who no longer needed the witcher and whom the witcher therefore never expected to see again. All the greater was his astonishment.
The bee keeper began by thanking Geralt wordily and handing him a small bag full of money to pay his witchers fees. He accepted feeling the slightly mocking glances of Regis and Cahir. More than once during the march he had complained to them of human ingratitude emphasizing how futile and foolish objective altruism was.
And then the excited bee keeper finally told them his news: So the mistletoe cutters that is the Druids sir witcher are sitting in the oak woods on the lake Loc Monduirn which is located about thirty-five miles west of here.
The bee keeper had heard the news while trading honey and wax with a relative and the relative in turn had heard it from an acquaintance a diamond hunter. When the bee keeper learned that the Druids were nearby he came running to tell. And now he was beaming with the contentment pride and importance that any liar has when their lie proves to be true by chance.
Geralt had originally planned to strike out immediately for Loc Monduirn but his companions protested vigorously. Regis and Cahir argued that they should use the money from the bee keeper to replenish their supplies and equipment in the city. Milva added that they should buy some arrows because they constantly needed to hunt game and she didnt intend to shoot with sharpened sticks. Dandelion wanted to spend at least one night sleeping in a bed in an inn where he could bathe and enjoy a nice beer before bedtime.
The Druids everyone told Geralt would not run away.
Although it is pure coincidence said the vampire Regis with a strange smile our team is definitely on the right track and absolutely headed in the right direction. Therefore it is apparent that we are inevitably destined to encounter the Druids. A delay of a day or two will play no role.
Haste however he remarked philosophically gives the impression that time is terribly short. It should usually imply an alarm signal that suggests that one should slow down and consider their path reasonably.
Geralt did not argue or contradict the philosophy of the vampire although the nightmares that haunted him at night reminded him to hurry. Even though he was unable to remember the content of these dreams after waking.
It was the seventeenth of September the full moon. Six days before the autumn equinox.
Milva Regis and Cahir were in charge of making purchases and replenishing their equipment. Geralt and Dandelion in contrast went out to get more news from the residents of Riedbrune.
Riedbrune was situated in a bend of the Newi River. It was a small town if you only counted the brick and wooden buildings that were within the ring of palisade-crowned earthworks. But no more than one-tenth of the population lived in the city center in the buildings that were enclosed by the ramparts. Meanwhile nine-tenths lived in the noisy sea of ​​huts cottages booths sheds tents and caravans outside of the city.
Cicerone the bee keepers relative guided the witcher and the poet. He was a young grated and arrogant man – a typical specimen of an urban street rat who was born in the gutter bathed in the gutter and had satisfied his thirst in the gutter many times. He was like a trout in a crystal-clear mountain stream as he led them through the noise crowds dirt and stench of the city. The opportunity to guide someone through his repulsive city clearly pleased him. Ignoring the fact that no one asked him he enthusiastically passed on his street boys knowledge. He explained that Riedbrune was an important milestone for the Nilfgaardian settlers who moved north to get to the promised land-lots from the Emperor: four hides or about fifty acres. And a ten year tax exemption. This was because Riedbrune lay at the mouth of the Dol Newi Valley along the Theodula Pass that cut through the North Case of the Amell Mountains and next to Riverdell which associated with countries that had long been Nilfgaardian subjects – Mag Turga Geso Metinna and Maecht. The town of Riedbrune he explained was the last city in which the settlers could still rely on something more than themselves their wives and whatever they had in their wagons. That was why the majority of the settlers camped before the city quite a long time catching their breath before that last leg of the journey – the Yaruga and beyond. And many of them he said with gutter-patriotism and pride settled permanently in the city because the city oho was cultured and was not some kind of a fetid backwater that smelled of manure.
The town of Riedbrune stank vigorously of many things including manure.
Geralt had been here once years ago but he didnt recognize it now. Too much had changed. Previously there were not as many troopers in black coats and armor with silver emblems on their epaulets. Previously the Nilfgaardian language was not always heard. Previously there had been no quarry in the city filled with ragged dirty emaciated and bloodstained men who pounded on rectangular stone blocks and were whipped by black-clothed guards.
Their guide told them that there were many Nilfgaardian soldiers stationed here but not for long – they were only taking a break before they marched out to hunt the guerrillas of the organization called the Free North Case. The Nilfgaardians needed more workers because they planned to replace the old wooden mounting with a large brick fortress made from the great stones of the quarry. And those stones were mined by prisoners of war. From Lyria and Aedirn from the areas formerly known as Sodden Bruges and Angren and from Temeria. There were about four hundred prisoners at work here in Riedbrune. A good five hundred worked in the mines and surface mines in the area of ​​Belhaven and over a thousand built bridges and a smooth road through the Theodula Pass.
There had been a scaffold in the towns marketplace last time Geralt had been here but it had been much more modest. It had not aroused disgusting associations and had not had so many devices as the new gallows – stakes forks and bars. It had not been hung with so many stinking disgusting and rotting decorations.
When they came into view of the scaffold the street boy told them that the recently appointed military governor Lord Fulk Artevelde was responsible for the fragments of human anatomy that adorned it. Because Lord Fulk relied heavily on the executioner. Lord Fulk was not to be trifled with he added. He was a stern Lord.
They found the street boys friend the diamond hunter in a tavern. He made a poor impression on Geralt. He was in the pale trembling half-sober half-drunk half real half dream state that a man reaches when he drinks for several days and nights without interruption. The witchers hopes fell. At first it seemed that the sensational news of the Druids nearby location had originated from an ordinary delirium.
However the hung-over diamond hunter answered their questions consciously and meaningfully. He jokingly parried Dandelions accusation that he did not look like a diamond hunter by saying that even if he ever had found a diamond he would still look like this. He described the whereabouts of the Druids at the Lake Monduirn concretely and precisely without picturesque decorations and overblown fuss. He allowed himself the question of what the travelers wanted with the Druids and was honored with contemptuous silence. He warned them that to go to the oaks of the Druids was certain death as the Druids tended to catch intruders lock them away in wicker cages and then pray and chant incantations while they burnt them alive. This baseless rumor and sinister superstition as it turned out had migrated with the Druids.
Their conversation was interrupted by nine armed soldiers dressed in black uniforms with epaulets that carried the sign of the sun.
Are you said the sergeant commanding the troops while he tapped an oak stick against his calf the witcher named Geralt?
Yes Geralt replied after a moments hesitation I am.
Then you want to follow us.
How certain are you that I want that? Am I under arrest?
The soldier stared at him for a seemingly endless moment without any respect. There was no doubt that his eight-man escort gave him the audacity to do so.
No he said finally. You are not under arrest. It has not been commanded to arrest you. If it had been commanded sir I would have asked you differently. Quite differently.
Geralt adjusted his sword belt rather pointedly. And I he said coldly would have responded differently.
Come come gentlemen. Dandelion decided to intervene and he put something on his face that resembled a politicians smile. Why this tone? We are decent people we should not have to fear the government. And yes we are willing to help the authorities. To the extent that the opportunity presents itself of course. And for this the government owes us does not it Mr. Military? At least such a little thing as an explanation or the reason for which it intends to restrict our civil freedoms.
It is war sir replied the soldier not impressed by the flowing speech. Freedom as the name suggests is something for peace. But as for the reason that will be explained to you by the governor. I carry out commands not discussions.
Where hes right hes right conceded the witcher and winked easily at the troubadour. So lead me to the governor honorable soldier. You Dandelion go back to the others and tell them what happened. Do what needs to be done. Regis will know.
What does a witcher want on the North Case? What is he doing here?
The question was asked by a broad-shouldered dark-haired man with a scarred face and a leather patch over his left eye socket. The sight of this cyclopean face in a dark alley would have elicited horror in many. Quite mistakenly considering that it was the face of Lord Fulk Artevelde the governor of Riedbrune and the senior keeper of law and order throughout the region.
What is a witcher looking for on the North Case? repeated the highest-ranking upholder of the law throughout the region.
Geralt sighed shrugged his shoulders and faked indifference. You know the answer to your question sir. Im a witcher hired by the bee keeper from the river country to protect them on their march here. And as a witcher Im looking to earn money on the North Case or anywhere else. I wander in any direction that I may have clients.
Naturally. Fulk Artevelde nodded. At least according to your story. But you separated from the bee keeper two days ago and you are preparing to march further south in some strange company. For what purpose?
Geralt did not look away – he focused his scorching gaze on the governors single eye. Am I under arrest?
No. For now you are not.
Then I suppose my purpose is to march towards my goal and my private affairs.
I would however recommend honesty and openness. If only to prove to that you are not guilty of any wrongdoing and the government does not have to fear for its safety from you. I will try to repeat the question: What is the goal of your journey witcher?
Geralt hesitated. Im trying to get to the Druids that formerly lived in Angren but have now moved to this area. You could have learned this easily from the bee keeper that I have escorted.
Who hired you against the Druids? Did the conservationists perhaps burn one person too many in their wicker cages?
Fairy tales rumors and superstition started by strange people. Im looking for information from the Druids not their blood. But really Lord Governor it seems to me that I have certainly been open enough to prove Im not guilty of any wrongdoing.
Its not about your guilt. At least not just yet. It would however please me greatly if our conversation were dominated by the sounds of mutual accommodation. Contrary to appearances the purpose of this discussion is to preserve your life and the life of your companions among other things.
Geralt did not reply immediately. Youve made me very curious sir. Among other things. I will certainly listen to your explanations with great interest.
Without a doubt. We will come to these explanations but gradually. In stages. Have you ever Mr. Witcher heard of the establishment of a witness? Do you know what that is?
I know. Someone who wants to evade their responsibility after squealing on the miners.
An over-simplification Fulk Artevelde said without a smile in the typical way of the Nordlings. You often cover gaps in your education with sarcastic caricature and simplification which you find funny. The law of the Empire applies here on the North Case Mr. Witcher. More precisely the law of the Empire applies here until the prevailing lawlessness is eradicated – root and branch. The best way to stamp out lawlessness and banditry is the scaffold which youve certainly seen in the marketplace. But sometimes it is also the establishment of witnesses.
He paused for effect. Geralt did not interrupt.
Not long ago said the governor we managed to lure a gang of young criminals into an ambush. The bandits resisted and were killed…
But not all? guessed Geralt without further ado becoming a little bored with all the eloquence. Youve taken one alive. He was promised a pardon if he will testify as a witness. That is if he accuses someone. And he accused me.
What makes you say that? Have you had any contact with the local criminal underworld? Now or earlier?
No. I have not. Neither now nor earlier. Therefore forgive me Lord Governor but this whole affair is either a total misunderstanding or a fraud. Or a provocation directed against me. In the latter case I would suggest not wasting any time but to get to the point.
So you think this is a provocation directed against you said the governor as he rubbed his brow which was disfigured by a scar. Perhaps contrary to your earlier claims you do have a reason to fear the law?
No. Instead I begin to fear that soon the fight against crime here will run rampant without requiring details and without a lengthy test of whether someone is guilty or innocent. But maybe thats just a caricature and simplification typical for a stupid Nordling. Which would explain why said Nordling still does not understand how the governor of Riedbrune is going to save his life.
Fulk Artevelde studied him for a while in silence. Then he clapped his hands. Bring her in he called to the soldiers.
Geralt calmed himself down with a couple of breaths because all of the sudden he had a certain idea that caused heart palpitations and increased adrenaline. Shortly afterwards he had to take another few breaths he even had to run his hand under the table and cast a sign to calm himself – an unprecedented event. The effect – this was also unprecedented – was zero. He was hot. And cold.
Because the guards had just brought Ciri into the room.
Oh look here said Ciri immediately after being placed in the chair with her hands tied behind her back. Look what the wind blew in!
Artevelde made a brief gesture. One of the guards a tall guy with the face of a not particularly bright lad casually slapped Ciri so hard that the chair shook.
Forgive her your honor the guard said apologetically and surprisingly gently. Shes young stupid. Reckless.
Angouleme Artevelde said slowly and clearly. I promised that I would listen to you. But that means that I will listen to you answer to my questions. I remember your antics. If you do not listen to me you will be penalized for it. Do you understand?
Yes Uncle.
A gesture. A slap. The chair wobbled.
Shes young muttered the guard as he rubbed his hand on his hip. Reckless…
Geralt already saw that it was not Ciri and could only wonder at his confusion. A thin trail of blood ran from the girls upturned nose. The girl pulled air hard through her nose and smiled predatorily.
Angouleme repeated the governor. Do you understand?
Yes Lord Fulk.
Who is this Angouleme?
The girl drew another deep breath bowed her head and stared at Geralt with her wide eyes. Nut-brown not green. Then she shook her straw-blond hair and a disheveled mop fell forward in streaks on her forehead.
Ive never seen him before. She licked off the blood that had run onto her lip. But I know who he is. Ive already told you this Lord Fulk now you can see that I wasnt lying. He is Geralt. He is a witcher. Ten days ago he crossed the Yaruga and he is travelling towards Toussaint. Isnt that right Uncle White Hair?
Young… reckless… said the guard quickly and cast a worried look at the governor.
But Fulk Artevelde only furrowed his brow and shook his head. Youre going to make jokes on the scaffold Angouleme. Which is fine with me. Who is Geralt travelling with?
I have already told you this also! With a pretty boy named Dandelion a troubadour who has a lute. With a young woman who has dark blond hair worn in a braid that is cut at the neck. I do not know her name. And with a man without a description his name likewise was not described. Altogether there are four.
Geralt rested his chin on his fists looking at the girl with interest.
Angouleme did not lower her gaze. Your eyes she said. They are so weird!
Go on go on urged the governor. Angouleme frowned. Who else travels in the witchers company?
No one. I told you there are four. Have you no ears uncle?
A gesture a slap and the blood flowed again. The guard rubbed his hand on his hip and remarked on the recklessness of youth.
Youre lying Angouleme said the governor. I ask again how many are there?
As you wish Lord Fulk. As you wish. As you like. There are two hundred. Three hundred! Six hundred!
Lord Governor! Geralt yelled quickly and sharply before they could strike her. It is possible. What shes said is so precise that no one could call her liar rather incompletely informed. But where did she get this information? She even admitted that this is the first time in her life that shes seen me. And this is the first time in my life that Ive seen her. I can assure you of that.
Thank you – Artevelde looked at him askance – for helping with the investigation. You are a valuable help. When I begin to question you I hope you will be just as talkative. Angouleme did you hear what the Lord Witcher said? Speak. And do not ask questions.
It was said – the girl licked the blood away from her runny nose – that if you notified the authorities of planned crime and revealed who was planning it then you would be pardoned. Well Im talking right? I know of a planned crime and I want to prevent it. Hear what I say: Nightingale and his Hanse are waiting in Belhaven to make cold this witcher and his company. The contract was given to them by a half-elf a stranger – the devil knows from where nobody knows him. All this half-elf told us was: who how he looks how he would arrive where he would leave from and in what kind of company. He warned that he was a witcher – not some wimp but a clever fellow that they should not play the hero but stab him in the back shoot him with a crossbow or if possible poison him if he eats or drinks in Belhaven. The half-elf gave Nightingale money. A lot of money. And he promised more after completion.
After completion said Fulk Artevelde. So this half-elf is still in Belhaven? With Nightingale and his gang?
Maybe. I dont know. Its been over two weeks since I ran away from Nightingales Hanse.
That would be the reason why youre blowing the whistle on him? The witcher smiled. Personal accounts?
The girls eyes narrowed and her swollen lips twisted repugnantly. Fuck you and my accounts Uncle! By blowing the whistle Im saving your life right? You might thank me!
Thank you Geralt said before they could beat her. I just wanted to say that when it comes to accounts your credibility sinks crown-witness. People tell on others to save their skin and their lives but when they want revenge they lie.
Our Angouleme has no chance to save her life Fulk Artevelde interrupted. But she can save her skin if she wants to. For me this is an absolutely credible motive. What Angouleme? You want to save your skin dont you?
The girl pursed lips. And paled visibly.
Bandits said the governor with contempt have the courage of a chicken. They have the courage to attack and rob the weak and to kill the defenseless yes. But to look death in the eye that they cannot do.
We shall see she growled.
We shall see agreed Fulk seriously. And hear. You will scream your lungs out on the scaffold Angouleme.
Your grace you promised.
And I keep my promises. If what you have confessed proves to be true.
Angouleme jerked around on the chair. Her whole slender body seemed to point to Geralt. And she shrieked whats that? Not the truth? Let him deny that he is Geralt the witcher! Tell me that I am not credible! I could have let him ride to Belhaven because then there would be proof that Im not lying! You would have found his body in the gutter. Except that then you would say I had not prevented the crime and had no mercy! Yes? You damned tricksters! Nothing but swindlers!
Do not beat her said Geralt. Please.
There was something in his voice that stopped the half-raised hands of the governor and the guard.
Angouleme lifted her nose in the air and looked at him intently. Thank you Uncle she said. But beatings are nothing if they want to hit me. Ive been beaten from an early age Im used to it. If you want to be kind then confirm that I am telling the truth. So they keep their word. Hang me damn it!
Take her away Fulk ordered and gestured for Geralt who wanted to protest to be silent.
We do not need her anymore he said when they were alone. I know everything and will give you explanations. And then I will ask for reciprocity.
First – the witchers voice was cold – explain what that noisy finale was about. And why it ended with the odd request to be hanged. As a crown-witness the girl has done her part.
Not yet.
How?
Homer Straggen called the Nightingale is an exceedingly dangerous criminal. Cruel and bold crafty lucky and not stupid. The fact that he gets away with impunity incites others. I must put an end to it. Thats why I got involved in an agreement with Angouleme. I promised that if as a result of her confession Nightingale and his gang were taken and broken we would hang Angouleme.
Im sorry? the witcher said in amazement. So this is the establishment of a witness? Cooperation with the authorities gets you – the noose? And what do you get for refusal to cooperate?
The stake. Preceded by tearing out the eyes and the breasts with hot pincers.
The witcher did not say a word.
That is called a deterrent Fulk Artevelde went on after a while. Absolutely essential in the fight with the banditry. Why do you clench your fists so hard that I can almost hear the knuckles cracking? Are you perhaps a supporter of the humane killing? You can afford this luxury because you mainly fight against beings who may as ridiculous as it may sound kill humanely. I cannot afford such a luxury. Ive seen merchant caravans and houses that were robbed by Nightingale and his ilk. Ive seen what they did to men to make them reveal their magic keywords and tell where they hid caskets and coffers. Ive seen women slit open if the have failed to satisfy Nightingale or had no hidden valuables. Ive seen people who have had worse done to them only so that the robbers could have their fun. Angouleme whose fate moved you so has committed these kinds of jokes thats for sure. She was in the gang long enough. And if the pure coincidence that shes run away from the gang had not come to pass no one would have heard of the ambush in Belhaven and you would have met her otherwise. Perhaps it would have been her that shot you in the back with a crossbow.
I dont like what-ifs. Do you know why she fled from the gang?
I confess I am vague on this issue and neither did my people get bogged down with it. But everyone knows that Nightingale is a man who I would say naturally reduces women to their primary role. If he could not otherwise succeed in persuading the woman to the role he would force her using violence. In addition generational conflicts have certainly developed. Nightingale is a mature man but the rest of his cronies are greenhorns like Angouleme. But that is all speculation basically I dont care. And I allow myself to wonder why you care? Why did the sight of Angouleme wake such vivid emotions in you?
A strange question. The girl reported an attack on me the plan of her former cronies on behalf of a half-elf. This is sensational in itself because I have no quarrel with any half-elves. The girl also knows who I am travelling with. Including details such as the troubadour is called Dandelion and the woman has a truncated braid. Its because of these details that I guess it is all a lie or a provocation. It wouldnt be difficult for someone to grab and question the bee keeper with whom I was travelling last week. And then you stage this…
Enough! Artevelde slammed his fist on the table. Youve got too much at stake here witcher. So I am staging something here? And for what purpose? In order to deceive you to lure you with a yarn? And who are you then that you have such fear of a provocation? Only the criminals burn their hats Mr. Witcher. Only the criminals!
Give me another explanation.
No you give one to me.
Im sorry. I have none.
I could make something up. The governor smiled wickedly. But why? Lets set the record straight. It does not interest me who wants to see you dead and why. I do not care why that someone has such excellent information about you down to the color and length of your hair. Moreover I didnt need to tell you anything about the attack witcher. I could have left your company in peace and then used you to bait the unsuspecting Nightingale. Watching you waiting until Nightingale set his hook and you swallowed the string weight and float. And then I could have taken him. Because it is him I am interested in. If you had to die for me to take him? Ha a necessary evil worth the cost!
He stopped. Geralt made no comment.
You should know sir witcher the governor continued after a short pause that Ive promised myself that the law will prevail in this region. At any cost and by any means per fas et nefas. Because the law is not the jurisprudence not a thick book full of paragraphs of philosophical treatises no driveling fantasies of justice no hackneyed phrases of morality and ethics. The law is safe highways and roads. You can walk safely through the streets in this city even after dark. You can go to the lavatory in the inns and taverns and leave your purse and wife at the table. The law is the quiet sleep of people who are sure that they will be awakened by the crowing of the cock not the red rooster! And for those who break the law – the rope the hatchet and the red-hot iron! A punishment that deters others. Those who break the law have to take their punishment. With all available means and methods… Hey witcher! I can see disapproval painted on your face; do you dislike my methods or their targets? I think the methods! Because the methods are easy to criticize but do you want to live in a safe world or not? Well answer!
I have nothing to say.
I think you do.
I Lord Fulk said Geralt calmly even like the world youre envisioning and imagining.
Really? Your face is evidence of something else.
The world in your imagination is the perfect world for a witcher. It will never lack work for a witcher. Instead of law books paragraphs and driveling fantasies of justice your world brings lawlessness anarchy despotism the selfishness of petty kings and autocrats the overzealousness of careerists who wish to win favor with their superiors the blind vengeance of fanatics the cruelty of vigilante justice and revenge sadistic revenge. Your vision is a world of fear where people fear to leave their houses after dark – not for fear of bandits but of the guardians of the law because large-scale bandit hunts always lead to the fact that the bandits join the ranks of law enforcement en bloc. Your vision is a world of bribery and the provocation of the press a world of witnesses and false witnesses. A world of spying and forced confessions. Denunciation and fear of denunciation. And inevitably the day will come in your world when the wrong person has their breast torn out with pincers and innocent people will be hanged or impaled. And then it will be a world of crime. In short he concluded a world in which a witcher would feel like a fish in water.
Please said Fulk Artevelde after a pause as he rubbed the eye socket hidden by his leather eye patch. An idealist! A witcher. A professional who regularly kills. And yet an idealist. And a moralist. Thats dangerous in your profession witcher. Its a sign that youve gradually grown out of your profession. One day youll wonder if you should slay a Striga – because maybe it is an innocent Striga? Perhaps my world has blind fanaticism and vengeance? I hope it does not get that far. But… I hope it does not but it is indeed possible. If someone would violate a person close to you in a cruel and sadistic manner then I would like to return to this conversation and the issue of appropriate penalties. Who knows maybe our views wouldnt differ so much? But today here and now it is a non-issue that we dont need to discuss or consider. Today we are talking about concrete things. And you witcher are concrete!
Geralt slightly raised an eyebrow.
Even though youve spoken derisively about my methods and my vision of world order I will use you my dear witcher to achieve this vision. I repeat: I have sworn to myself that those who break the law will get what they deserve. Every one of them. From the little rogue who falsifies the weights on the market to the man who steals a shipment of bows and arrows meant for the army. Robbers pickpockets thieves bandits. The terrorists of the organization Free North Case who proudly call themselves freedom fighters. And Nightingale. Especially Nightingale. Nightingale must get his punishment the method is irrelevant.
We must act quickly – before the amnesty is proclaimed when he can sit laughing up his sleeve at me… witcher Ive been waiting for months for something that would allow me to strike at him pre-emptively. Something that allows me to direct him to ensure that he makes a mistake a crucial error that will be his undoing. Must I continue to talk or have you guessed?
Ive guessed but continue talking.
This mysterious half-elf who appears to be the initiator and instigator of the attack has warned Nightingale of the witcher has recommended caution has advised against complacency arrogance and swagger. I know that he had reasons to give those warnings. But the warnings will do no good. Nightingale is making a mistake. He will attack a witcher who is forewarned and ready to defend himself. He will attack a witcher who has been awaiting his attack. And that will be the end of the bandit Nightingale. Ill make an agreement with you Geralt. You will be my crown-witcher. Do not interrupt me. The agreement is simple each page covers an obligation each holds its own commitment. You must prioritize Nightingale. For my part…
He fell silent for a moment smiling slyly.
I will not ask who you are where you come from or where and why you are travelling. I will not ask why you speak Nilfgaardian with a barely perceptible accent or why dogs and horses sometimes shy away from you. I will let the troubadour Dandelion keep his tube filled with records. And I will not inform the Imperial Intelligence Service about you until Nightingale is dead or sits in jail with me. Perhaps even later whats the rush? Ill give you time. And an opportunity.
An opportunity for what?
To get to Toussaint. That ridiculous fairy tale principality whose boundaries even the Nilfgaardian Intelligence Service will not dare violate. Afterwards many things can change. There will be an amnesty. Perhaps the expansion of the Yaruga will stop. Perhaps even a lasting peace.
The witcher was silent for a long time. The disfigured face of the governor remained motionless but his eye sparkled.
Agreed the witcher said.
Without terms? Without conditions?
With two of them.
Yes of course. Im listening.
First I must spend a few days riding to the west. To Loc Monduirn. To the Druids because…
Do you think Im a fool? Fulk Artevelde violently interrupted. Trying to dupe me? To the west? Everyone knows where your path leads! Including Nightingale who set his ambush along the way. To the south to Belhaven at the point where the Newi crosses the Sansretour Valley leading to Toussaint.
You mean…
… that the Druids are not at Loc Monduirn. For nearly a month. Theyve travelled through the Sansretour Valley to Toussaint under the wing of the Princess Anarietta of Beauclair who has a soft spot for all sorts of eccentrics cranks and fabulous creatures. Such people are willingly granted asylum in her little fairyland. You know that witcher. Do not hold me a fool. Do not attempt to dupe me!
Im not trying to Geralt said slowly. I give you my word that I am not. Tomorrow I depart for Belhaven.
Havent you forgotten something?
No I have not. My second condition: I want Angouleme. I prefer an amnesty for her that releases her from prison. Your crown-witcher needs your crown-witness. Quickly do you agree or not?
Agreed replied Fulk Artevelde almost instantly. I have no choice. Angouleme is yours. I know that she is the only reason you are with me.
The vampire rode side by side with Geralt. He listened attentively and did not interrupt. The witcher was not mistaken in his perspicacity.
We are five not four he quickly summarized after Geralt had finished his story. We have been five since the end of August and five crossed the Yaruga. Milva only cut off her braid in the river country. Only one week ago. Your blonde protégé knew of Milvas cut braid. But did not count five. Strange.
Is this the strangest thing about the whole story?
Not at all. The strangest thing is Belhaven. The town the ambush was laid in. A town that lies far in the mountains through the Newi Valley and the Theodula Pass…
Where we never wanted to ride concluded the witcher spurring Roach who had begun to lag behind. Three weeks ago when the half-elf ordered the bandit Nightingale to assassinate me we were still in Angren wanting to reach Caed Dhu and fearing the Ysgith swamps. We didnt even know that we would have to cross the Yaruga. Hell this morning we still did not know that…
We knew interrupted the vampire. We knew we were looking for the Druids. Both this morning and three weeks ago. This mysterious half-elf organized an ambush on the road that leads to the Druids confident that we will take just this path. He just knows…
…better than we do where that path leads. The witcher retaliated against Regis earlier interruption. How does he know?
That you will have to ask him. That is why you accepted the governors offer is not it?
Of course. I reckon that Ill have a little talk with this gentleman with this half-elf. Geralt smiled distastefully. However even without that isnt the explanation obvious? That hes not working alone?
The vampire studied him for a while in silence.
I do not like what you are saying Geralt he said finally. I do not like what you are thinking. That is an ugly thought. It is premature and does not take everything into consideration. The result of prejudice and resentment.
Then explain how…
Anyway Regis interrupted in a tone that Geralt had never heard from him before. Anyway that is not the only explanation. For example have you considered the possibility that your blonde protégé is simply lying?
Well well Uncle cried Angouleme who was riding behind them on the mule named Draakula. Dont make any accusations before you can prove them!
Im not your uncle my dear.
And Im not your dear Uncle!
Angouleme – the witcher turned in his saddle – be quiet.
As you wish. Angouleme calmed down instantly. You can order me. You brought me out of jail and tore me from the clutches of Lord Fulk. You are now the leader of my Hanse…
Be quiet please.
Angouleme muttered something to herself stopped spurring Draakula and fell back because Geralt and Regis increased their pace and overtook Dandelion Milva and Cahir who rode ahead of them. They rode towards the mountains along the banks of the Newi River whose waters were a cloudy yellow-brown after the recent rains and streaked across stones and swells. They were not alone. Quite often they encountered Nilfgaardian squadrons individual riders settlers wagons and merchant caravans.
To the south ever closer and more threatening rose the Amell Mountains. And the sharp needle of Gorgon the Devils Mountain which sank into the clouds that covered the whole sky.
When will you tell them? the vampire asked pointing to the three riding behind them.
When we make camp.
Dandelion was the first person to speak after Geralt had finished. Correct me if Im wrong he said. That girl youve willingly and without any conditions accepted into our company is a criminal. In order to protect her from punishment – that she deserves by the way – you decided to collaborate with the Nilfgaardians. You let them hire you – what am I saying not only yourself but all of us. We should all help the Nilfgaardians capture and put to death any local predators. In short: you Geralt have become a Nilfgaardian mercenary a bounty hunter a hired assassin. And we must play the role of your acolytes… your famuli…
You have an incredible talent for simplifying Dandelion muttered Cahir. Do you really not understand what is at stake? Or are you just talking to talk?
Shut up Nilfgaardian. Geralt?
Lets start – the witcher threw a twig he had played for a long time into the fire – with the fact that this is my plan and I do not need anyones help. I can do it alone. Without acolytes or famuli.
Youve got guts Uncle Angouleme made herself heard. But there are twenty-four men also with guts in Nightingales Hanse. They will not be easily intimidated – even by a witcher. And when it comes to a sword fight even if everything they say about witchers is true a single man cannot stand against two dozen. You saved my life so I will repay you in kind. By warning you. And helping you.
What the hell – a Hanse?
Aen Hanse said Cahir in our language means an armed crew but one that is held together by friendships…
A secret society?
Something like that. The word as Ive heard it in the local jargon…
A Hanse is a Hanse broke in Angouleme. Or you could say a gang or a clique. But thats not important. What is important is my warning. One person has no chance against a whole Hanse. Moreover Nightingale has many friends and allies in Belhaven and the surrounding area. And if you dont know the way there are several paths that do not lead to the city. I tell you: the witcher will not succeed alone. I dont know what customs prevail with you but I will not leave the witcher in the lurch. He accepted me into your company like Uncle Dandelion said willingly and without any conditions even though Im a criminal… my hair still stinks of prison because I havent been able to wash it yet… The witcher and no one else brought me out of there. I am grateful to him. Therefore I will not let him down. I will bring him to Belhaven to Nightingale and to this half-elf. I will go along with him.
I too Cahir said immediately.
And I likewise! Milva said fiercely.
Dandelion pressed the tube with the manuscripts to his chest. He had not separated from it recently even for a moment. You could tell that he was struggling with his thoughts. And the thoughts of what the gains would be.
Do not meditate poet Regis said softly. Theres nothing to be ashamed of. You are even less vindicated to participate in a bloody fight of swords and knives than me. We were not taught to cripple our neighbors with iron. In addition… Im also… he advised the witcher and Milva with flashing eyes. Im a coward he confessed shortly. If I do not have to I do not want to go through something like that time on the barge and the bridge again. Never again. And I ask to be exempted from the battle group that goes to Belhaven.
From that barge and bridge Milva replied flatly you carried me out on your back when my legs were so weak that they buckled. If there would have been a coward in your place he would have fled and left me alone. But there was no coward. There was only you Regis.
Well said Aunty said Angouleme convinced. I dont quite understand whats being discussed but it was well said.
Im not your aunt! Milvas eyes sparkled threateningly. Watch it lady! Call me that again and youll see!
What will I see?
Silence! barked the witcher sharply. Enough Angouleme! I see I need to call all of you to order. The time of wandering at random into the blue just because there might be something in the blue is gone. Its time for concrete action. Time to cut throats. Because finally there is someones throat that we can cut. Those who have not yet registered should understand – at last we have an actual enemy within reach. A half-elf who wants us dead an agent of our enemys forces. Thanks to Angouleme we were warned and identified risk – danger averted as the saying goes. I need to get this half-elf and squeeze out of him whose orders he is acting on. Do you finally understand Dandelion?
Apparently the poet said calmly I understand more and better than you. Without covert squeezing I can imagine that that mysterious half-elf is acting on the commands of Dijkstra whose ankle you shattered in front of my eyes on Thanedd. According to the report of Marshal Vissegerd Dijkstra has no doubts that we are Nilfgaardian spies. And after our escape from the Lyrian Corps and Queen Meve a few points are guaranteed to be added to our list of crimes…
Wrong Dandelion put Regis softly. It is not Dijkstra. Nor Vissegerd. Nor Meve.
Who then?
Any judgment any conclusion would be premature.
True said the witcher coldly. That case must be examined on the spot. And the conclusions can be drawn from the autopsy.
But I insisted Dandelion still consider this idea to be stupid and risky. It is fortunate that we were warned of the ambush that we know of the half-elf. Now that we know we can take a big detour around it. This elf or half-elf can wait for us while we continue on our way quickly…
No interrupted the witcher. Thats the end of the discussion my friend. The end of the anarchy. It is time for our… Hanse… to finally get a leader.
Everyone except for Angouleme looked at him expectantly.
Myself Angouleme and Milva he said will ride to Belhaven. Cahir Regis and Dandelion will turn at the Sansretour Valley and ride to Toussaint.
No said Dandelion quickly and firmly grabbing his tube. Not at any price. I cannot…
Shut up. This is not a discussion. That was a command from the leader of this Hanse! Ride to Toussaint – you Regis and Cahir. Wait for us there.
Toussaint means death to me the troubadour said weakly. If I am recognized at the castle in Beauclair Im done. I must reveal to you…
You must not the witcher cut him off. Too late. You could have pulled back but you didnt want to. You stayed in the company. To save Ciri. Right?
Yes.
So you will ride through the Sansretour Valley with Regis and Cahir. You will be in the mountains waiting for us – do not exceed the borders of Toussaint yet. But when… But if it proves necessary then exceed them. For apparently the Druids from the Caed Dhu are in Toussaint. If it proves necessary you will obtain the information from the Druids and go on looking for Ciri… alone.
What do you mean by alone? You cant expect that…
I do not expect but I am taking every possibility into account. For all cases. It is the last resort if you will. Maybe it will all go well and you wont need to pass into Toussaint. But in the other case… It is important because the Nilfgaardians will not pursue you into Toussaint.
True they wont added Angouleme. Its weird but Nilfgaard respects the boundaries of Toussaint. I hid there from pursuers once. But the knights there are no better than the blacks! They talk nobly and politely but they are quick to use their lances and swords. And they patrol the border constantly. They are called knights-errant. They ride alone in pairs or in threes. And they destroy the rabble. Which is us. Witcher you should make one change to your plans.
What?
If anyone is going to ride to Belhaven and to Nightingale it should be me you and Lord Cahir. And Aunty should ride with the others.
Why? Geralt calmed Milva with a gesture.
Because we need guys for this. Whats the matter Aunt? I know what Im talking about! If we get that far we might be able to intimidate them rather than use force. And no one in Nightingales Hanse would be afraid of three people when two of them are women.
Milva rides with us. Geralts fingers clasped the shoulder of the archer who was furious. Milva not Cahir. I do not want to ride with Cahir.
And why not? Asked Angouleme and Cahir almost simultaneously.
Indeed Regis said slowly. Why not?
Because I do not trust him the witcher said shortly.
The ensuing silence was awkward heavy almost sticky. The sounds of raised voices shouting and singing carried over from the forest where a merchant caravan had camped with another group of travelers.
Explain that Cahir said.
Someones betrayed us the witcher said dryly. After speaking with the governor and hearing Angoulemes information there is no doubt. And if you think about it you come to the conclusion that there is a traitor among us. Its easy to guess who.
It seems to me – Cahir drew his eyebrows together – that you are hinting that I am a traitor.
I do not hide – the voice of the witcher was cold – that the idea occurred to me anyway. There is good evidence. It would explain much. Very much.
Geralt said Dandelion. Arent you going a bit too far?
Let him talk. Cahir pursed his lips. Let him talk. Let him do what he wants.
We have all wondered – Geralt let his eyes wander over the faces of his companions – about the alleged calculation error. You know what I mean. That we were four not five. We thought that someone had simply made a mistake – the mysterious half-elf or Nightingale or Angouleme. But when one discards the version with the error? Then the next explanation arises: the team consists of five people but Nightingale is only supposed to kill four. Because the fifth is the assassins accomplice. Someone who has constantly informed him about the movements of the company. From the beginning from that moment the company was formed after eating the famous fish soup. When it enrolled in its ranks a Nilfgaardian. A Nilfgaardian who wants to bring Ciri into his power so he can pass her to his Emperor Emhyr because his life and future career depend on this…?
So I was not wrong Cahir said slowly. I am a traitor. A vicious duplicitous traitor?
Geralt Regis rejoined the discussion. Forgive my frankness but your version is as full of holes as an old sieve. And your way of thinking as Ive already told you is ugly.
I am a traitor repeated Cahir as if he had not heard the vampires words. From what I understand however there is no evidence of my betrayal – there are only the vague suspicions and presumptions of this witcher. From what I understand the burden falls on me to prove my innocence. Ill have to prove that I am not a horse. Yes?
Without pathos Nilfgaardian growled Geralt who stood before Cahir and fixed his eyes on him. If I had proof of your guilt I would waste no time talking but cut you into pieces like a herring! Do you know the principle of Cui Bono? Then tell me: who else but you would have the slightest reason to betray us? Who else but you would benefit from a betrayal?
There was a loud sustained roar from the camp of the merchant caravan. The black sky exploded with sparkling red and gold stars. The fireworks shot like a swarm of golden bees and fell as a colorful rain.
Im not a horse said the young Nilfgaardian in a powerful-sounding voice. Unfortunately I cannot prove it. But I can do something else. That which I do when I or something that I own is insulted – when my honor and dignity are kicked to the dirt and defiled.
His motion was lightning fast but he wasnt fast enough to strike the witcher at least he wouldnt have been if not for the witchers painful and aggravated knee. Geralt did not completely succeed with his dodge and the gloved fist hit him on the cheek with such force that he fell right back into the fire sending sparks flying. He jumped up slowed again by the pain in his knee. Cahir was already with him. And this time the witcher was not able to dodge him at all. Cahir thundered his fist against the side of his head and colorful fireworks flashed before his eyes even more beautiful than those of the merchants. Geralt spat a filthy curse and threw himself at Cahir embracing him with his arms and throwing him to the ground where they rolled in the gravel and crashed fists.
And all the while the sky was exploding with the spooky and unnatural light of artificial fire.
Stop it! roared Dandelion. Stop it you are both damned idiots!
Cahir struck Geralt who was trying to get up and knocked him off his feet again. The blow positively boomed. Geralt turned over pulled up and kicked him in the hip. Again they rolled around one over the other beating each other blinded by the blows just as much as the dust and sand in their eyes.
And suddenly they parted rolling away in different directions hands curled above their heads to protect themselves against the whistling blows raining down on them.
Milva had removed the wide leather belt from her hips and wrapped the buckle once around her hand. She ran to the fighters and began to beat them with all her strength sparing neither her arm nor the belt. The belt whistled and clapped as it met with hands shoulders back or arms – sometimes Cahirs sometimes Geralts. When they parted Milva jumped back and forth between them like a grasshopper still continuing to whip them one no more than the other.
You stupid jerks! she cried and sent a blow crashing onto Geralts back. You stupid jerks! Ill bring you to reason both of you!
Enough? she shouted even louder while Cahir covered his head with one of his hands. Are you ready to act reasonably? Have you calmed down?
Ready! bellowed the witcher. Enough!
Enough agreed Cahir curled up. Enough!
Its enough said the vampire. It really is Milva.
The archer was breathing heavily rubbing her forehead with the hand that had the belt wrapped around it.
Bravo Angouleme let herself be heard. Bravo Aunty.
Milva turned on her heel and swung the belt with full force at her shoulder. Angouleme shrieked fell down and began to cry.
I told you Milva came out breathing hard not to call me that again. I told you!
Nothings happened! Dandelion somewhat shakily assured the merchants and travelers who had come running from their nearby fires. Just a little misunderstanding among friends. A difference of opinion among friends. Already settled!
The witcher touched a loose tooth with his tongue and spit out the blood that flowed from his split lip. He could already feel swollen welts forming on his back and arms. One grew on his ear seemingly the size of a cauliflower. Beside him Cahir raised himself off the ground quite inelegantly. Cahir held his cheek and swollen welts were visible on his bare skin.
A stinking rain of brimstone fell to the ground the ashes of the last fireworks.
Angouleme was holding her shoulder and sobbing pitifully. Milva dropped the belt knelt down and after a brief moment of hesitation silently hugged herself.
I suggest the vampire said coldly that everyone keeps their hands to themselves. I suggest we never absolutely never come back to this subject.
Unexpectedly a wind began to blow and whistle from the mountains in which it seemed played some ghostly screams cries and lamentations. The clouds scudding across the sky took on fantastic shapes. The moon turned red as blood.
They were awakened before dawn by the furious rush of wings and a choir of goat milkers.
They left just after sunrise because later the sun would reflect on the snow-covered mountain tops with blinding bright light. They started long before the sun could show on the peaks. And incidentally the sky was covered with clouds long before that could happen.
They rode through forests the road always climbing higher and higher which was noticeable by the change in the trees. Oak and hornbeam suddenly stopped and in their place rose the darkness of beech trees. The ground smelled of mildew and was padded with fallen leaves cobwebs and fungi. Mushrooms were in abundance. The wet end of the summer had produced a veritable flood of fungus. In places the beech trees almost disappeared under the hats of mushrooms toadstools and fly agaric.
The beech woods were quiet; it looked as if most of the birds had moved away. Only the caws of crows soaked the edges of the thickets.
They listened to the silence and then suddenly spruce appeared. It started to smell of resin.
More and more they came upon bare hills and ridges where the wind pounced on them. The Newi River foamed over swells and cascades and its water became crystal-clear despite the rain.
The Gorgon loomed on the horizon. Ever nearer.
Glaciers and snow flowed down from the jagged edges of the mighty mountain which made the Gorgon look as if it were wrapped in white shawls. The summit of the Devils Mountain was constantly surrounded by clouds as if they were veiling the head and neck of a mysterious bride. Sometimes however the Gorgon shook like a dancer in her white dress – a beautiful but deadly sight: the avalanches tumbled down the steep mountainsides and swept away everything in their path – all the way down to the stone slopes of the mountain base and on to the Theodula pass then through the Newi and Sansretour Valleys ending in the black eyes of the mountain lakes.
The sun finally emerged from the clouds but it didnt stay for long – soon after it disappeared behind the mountains in the west making the sky glow with purple and gold flames.
They spent the night. The sun came up.
And then it was time to separate.
He carefully wriggled Milvas silk scarf around his head. He jammed on Regis hood. Once again he checked the position of the Sihil on the back and the two stilettos in his boots.
Nearby Cahir sharpened his long Nilfgaardian sword. Angouleme wrapped a woolen band around her forehead and stuck a hunting knife in her boot – a gift from Milva. The archer and Regis saddled their horses. The vampire had left his horse to Angouleme upgrading her from the mule Draakula.
They were ready. Only one thing remained to be done.
Come all of you.
They came.
Cahir son of Ceallach began Geralt trying not to sound pathetic. I have offended you with an unwarranted suspicion and acted maliciously towards you. First I do hereby apologize head bowed. I do apologize and ask you to forgive me. Also I ask all of you for forgiveness because it was cruel to make you watch and listen to it all.
I have omitted to Cahir and to you the reason for my anger my rage and my grief. They stem from the fact that I know who betrayed us. I know who betrayed and kidnapped Ciri who we want to save. My anger stems from the fact that we are talking about a person who was once very close to me.
Where we are what we are doing which way we go and what we want – its all been determined by means of detection and acquisition magic. It is not too difficult for a master of magic to locate a person from a distance and observe them – as long as that person was once well-known and close to them. And as long as they had formed a long-lasting mental contact with them making it possible to create their matrix. But the sorcerer and the sorceress of whom I speak have made a mistake. They exposed themselves. They were wrong about the number of members in the company and this mistake has betrayed them. Tell them Regis.
Geralt may be right Regis said slowly. Like any vampire I am an invisible magical target for detection probing and acquisition spells. One can calculate a vampire with analytical magic up-close however it is not possible to discover a vampire from a distance with a locating spell. A tracking spell will not show the vampire. Where the vampire is says the acquisition magic that no one had. Only a magician could therefore be mistaken in regard to us as follows: to count four when in truth we are five that is four men and a vampire.
We will take advantage of that error and get the magician the witcher took the floor again. Myself Cahir and Angouleme will ride to Belhaven and talk with the half-elf our would-be killer. We will not ask the half-elf at whose command he is working because we already know. We will ask him where the magician is. If we can get a location from him we will ride there. And take revenge.
All were silent.
Weve stopped counting the days so we have not even noticed that already is the twenty-fifth of September. Two days ago was the equinox. The equinox. Yes that was the same night you think it was. I see the sadness in your eyes. You received a signal then in that vile night when we camped next to the merchants who brandy made courageous enough to sing and launch fireworks. Surely you havent had a premonition as clearly as Cahir and I but you can imagine yes. You have a suspicion. And I fear that the suspicion is justified.
The crows flew over the treeless rocks and began to croak.
Everything indicates that Ciri is no longer alive. Two days ago on the equinox she was killed. Somewhere far from here – lonely alone and among hostile strangers.
We are left with only revenge. A bloody and cruel revenge about which stories will circulate for a hundred years. Such tales that people will be afraid to hear them after dark. And those who would like to repeat such a crime will tremble at the thought of our revenge. We will give them a shocking example of horror! With the method of Lord Fulk Artevelde the clever Lord Fulk who knows how to treat criminals with the gallows. We will make a deterrent example that will amaze even him!
Let us begin our journey to hell! Cahir Angouleme: to the horses. We ride along the Newi then we ascend to Belhaven. Dandelion Milva Regis: follow the Sansretour to the borders of Toussaint. You cannot miss the way the Gorgon will show you. See you soon.
Ciri stroked the black tomcat who had returned to the hut in the swamp. Like all cats its dislike of cold hunger and discomfort had eventually overshadowed its love of freedom. Now he lay on the girls lap offering his neck to pet and purring with pleasure.
The tomcat did not give a damn about the girls tale.
That was the only time that I dreamed of Geralt continued Ciri. I had not once seen him in a dream since the time we parted on the island of Thanedd since the Tower of Gulls. Therefore I thought he was dead. And then he suddenly appeared in this dream one of the dreams Yennefer had long ago taught me were prophetic precognitive and showed either the past or the future. It was the day before the equinox. In a small town whose name I forget. In a basement where Bonhart had locked me up. After he tortured me and forced me to confess who I was.
You told him who you were? Vysogota raised his head. You told him everything?
I paid – she gulped – for my cowardice with subjugation and self-loathing.
Tell me about this dream.
I saw it as if I were a mountain – tall and steep-edged like a stone knife. I saw Geralt. I heard what he said. Exactly. Every word as if I were there in person. I remember I wanted to call out to him and tell him that things were quite different than he thought that everything was not true that he was terribly misled… that he was mistaken about everything! That it was not the equinox yet and even if it was that I would not die on the equinox like he previously declared because I was still alive. And that he should not accuse Yennefer and say such things about her…
She paused for a moment stroked the cat and then sniffed violently.
But I had no voice. I couldnt even breathe… It was as if I were drowning. And then I awoke. The last thing I saw the last thing I remember from this dream were three riders. Geralt and two others galloping through a canyon with cascades falling down its walls…
Vysogota was silent.
If someone managed to sneak through the dark to the hut with the sagging thatch roof and if they had peeked through a crack in the shutters they would have seen in the dimly-lit interior a gray-bearded old man focusing on listening to the story of an ash-blonde girl an ugly scar on her disfigured cheek.
They would have seen a black cat sitting on the girls lap purring lazily and wanting to be petted further – to the delight of the mice passing through the hut.
But no one could see that. The hut with the sagged and mossy thatch roof was well-hidden in the mist of the boundless swamps of Pereplut where no one dared enter.
It is known that the witcher inflicts pain suffering and death. He perversely pleasures and delights in such simple feelings like a normal god-fearing person does with his wife on their wedding night. It visibly followeth that in this sense the witcher is an unnatural creature a contemptible and immoral degenerate originating from the foulest darkest depths of hell because indeed only the devil can delight in suffering and torment.
Anonymous
Monstrum or a Portrayal of Witchers
CHAPTER SIX
They left the road that led along the Newi Valley taking a shortcut through the mountains. They rode as fast as the path allowed. It was narrow sinuous and densely surrounded by fantastically-shaped rocks which were covered with different colored mosses and lichens. They rode between vertical rock walls from which striped ribbons of cascades and waterfalls hung. They rode through canyons and ravines and over varying small bridges spanning chasms where white foam whirled on the ground far below.
The angular blade of Mount Gorgon seemed to tower directly above their heads though they could not see the summit of the Devils Mountain – it sank into the clouds and fog that covered the sky. The weather – as it does in the mountains – changed for the worse in only a few short hours. It started to drizzle annoyingly and obnoxiously.
When evening came all three began to keep an impatient and nervous lookout for a shepherds hut a ruined sheepfold or at least a cave. For anything that would protect them against the night sky and dripping water.
It seems to have stopped raining said Angouleme with hope in her voice. Its only dripping through the holes in the roof of the hut now. Tomorrow if we are lucky we will reach Belhaven where we can stay in a nearby shed or barn.
We arent riding into town?
Absolutely not. Strangers on horses catch the eye and Nightingale has a lot of informers in the city.
Considering that the plan is to consciously offer ourselves up as bait…
No she interrupted him. Its a wretched plan. Together we will arouse suspicion. Nightingale is a cunning dog and the news that I was captured has certainly reached him by now. And if Nightingale suspects something then the half-elf will learn of it.
What do you suggest?
We go around the city to the east near the mouth of the Sansretour Valley where there are iron mines. I have a friend in one of the mines. We will pay him a visit. Who knows if were lucky perhaps this visit will be worth it?
Can you speak more clearly?
I will tomorrow. In the mine. I dont want to jinx it.
Cahir threw birch twigs into the fire. It had rained all day and any other timber would not have been able to burn. But the birch wood although it was wet only crackled a little before immediately starting to burn with high blue flame.
Where are you from Angouleme?
From Cintra witcher. Its a country by the sea at the mouth of the Yaruga.
I know where Cintra is.
Why are you asking if you know so much? Am I so interesting to you?
Lets say a little bit.
They were silent. The fire crackled.
My mother Angouleme finally said her gaze directed at the flames was a Cintrierin noble by the right of high birth. Her Houses coat-of-arms was a Meerkat. I would show it to you – because my mother gave me a locket with this stupid cat – but I lost it playing dice… But this shitty House shunned me because my mother supposedly had relations with someone from the general populace probably a stable-boy and I supposedly am a bastard a shame a disgrace and a stain on the Houses honor. So they gave me to some distantly related in-laws who certainly had neither a cat nor a dog nor any beast on their coat-of-arms but they were not bad to me. Sent me to school all in all hit me only a little… Although they reminded me quite often of who I was – a bastard begotten in the bushes. My mother visited me maybe three or four times when I was little. Then she stopped. It turns out that she didnt give a shit about me – even though…
How did you come to be among criminals?
You sound like an investigating judge she hissed and screwed up her face ludicrously. Among the criminals pah! Strayed from the path of virtue bah!
She muttered something to herself looked in her jacket for something and then pulled out something that was not exactly familiar to the witcher.
That One-Eyed Fulk she said vaguely as she eagerly rubbed a bit into her gums and inhaled some through her nose is a decent fellow after all. He took what he took but he left me the dust. Will you take a pinch witcher?
No. I would prefer if you also would take none.
Why?
Because.
Cahir?
I do not use Fisstech.
It seems I am among paragons of virtue. She shook her head. Will you preach moral certainty and lecture me that I will go blind deaf and hairless from the dust? That I will have a mentally defective child?
Leave off Angouleme. And finish your story.
The girl sneezed violently. Well as you will. Where was I… Aha. The war broke out you know the one with Nilfgaard and the relatives lost all their possessions and had to leave their home. They had three children of their own and I was too much to bear so they gave me a new home. It was run by the priests of some temple. A fun place as it turned out. A common whorehouse a brothel for people who liked to dine on succulent young fruits with white skins you get it? Little girls. And little boys too. I was already too old when I went there there were no lovers…
Quite unexpectedly she blushed; it could even be seen in the firelight. Almost none she forced out.
How old were you then?
Fifteen. I got to know a girl and five boys my age and slightly older. And we came to a unanimous agreement. We knew the legends and the stories. Of the madman DeI of Black Bart of the Cassini brothers… We wanted the freedom of the road the merry life of bandits! Why we said to ourselves should we stay where we only get something to eat twice a day and had to sell our asses to repulsive creeps…
Go easy on your choice of words Angouleme. You know too much cursing is unhealthy.
The girl squawked and spat into the fire. You really must be a paragon of virtue! Well Ill come to the point because I do not feel like talking. We found knives in the kitchen of the home – they were sufficient after we grinded them well on the whetstone and belt. We turned the legs of a chair into great clubs. We just needed horses and money so we waited until two scoundrels came regular customers old as the hills ha at least forty. They came sat down drank a little wine and waited until their priests as usual tied their selected young thing into a specially refined piece of furniture… But that day they did not get to fuck her!
Angouleme.
Okay okay. In short: we botched things up with the two old scoundrels three priests and a stable boy – the only one who had fought for the horses instead of fleeing. The temple guard would not give us the gate key so we burned the gatehouse until he came out but we spared his life because that was a better age – we were always benevolent and good. And we went on the robbers road. Thats how it went for us – sometimes good sometimes bad sometimes we dealt it and sometimes we took it. Sometimes we were tired sometimes hungry. Ha hungry more often. I caught and ate more of what creeps and crawls than I ever had in my life. And of what flies – I once even ate a kids kite because it was stuck together with glue made from flour.
She paused and vigorously ran her hand through her straw-blond hair.
But whats in the past is in the past. As far as I can tell you of those who escaped from the home with me no one lives. The last two Owen and Abel were done in a few days ago by the soldiers of Lord Fulk. Abel even dropped his sword like me but they cut him down anyway.
They spared me. But dont think it was out of loving kindness. They already had me stretched spread eagle on the ground when an officer came and forbade them the pleasure. Well then you came and saved me from the gallows…
She paused for a moment.
Witcher?
Im listening.
I know how I can prove my gratitude. If you just want to…
What?
I should go check on the horses Cahir said quickly standing up and wrapping his coat around him. Ill see how their feet are doing…
The girl sneezed sniffled and cleared her throat.
Not a word of it Angouleme he warned her feeling really bad really ashamed and really confused. Not a word!
She cleared her throat again. You really dont desire me? Not a bit?
Milva gave you a taste of the strap you snot-nosed brat. If you dont shut up immediately youll get a second helping from me.
Im not saying another word.
Good girl.
The slope was covered with small twisted pines that hung crookedly gaping pits and holes. There were also many boards secured with rubber stamps and connected by stairs ladders and scaffolds. Walkways protruded from the holes supported by crossed poles. On some walkways people were busily moving carts and wheelbarrows. The contents of the carts and wheelbarrows – at first glance muddy soil interspersed with rocks – were dumped from the walkways into a large square trough which then flowed into a complex of increasingly smaller and separated troughs. Water flowed continuously and noisily through the wooden troughs which were supported on low-post cross gutters of a wooded hill. They apparently derived somewhere down the slope.
Angouleme dismounted and signaled for Geralt and Cahir to dismount as well. They tied the horses to a fence and walked towards a building trudging through mud next to leaky gutters and pipes.
The iron ore is washed here said Angouleme while pointing. Over there it is brought out in the tunnels of the mine. They feed material there pouring it into the troughs where it is washed with water from the stream. The ore is deposited in sieves where it is separated out. There are many such mines and filtration camps around Belhaven. But the ore is then moved into the forested valleys like the Mag Turga because wood is needed for the furnaces and smelters…
Thanks for the lecture Geralt interrupted her with a sour expression. Ive already seen several mines in my life and I know what it takes to smelt. When will you finally reveal to us our purpose for riding here?
To chat with one of my acquaintances. Hes a pit foreman here. Come with me. Ha I see him already! There in the carpentry building. Come on.
That dwarf there?
Yes. His name is Golan Drosdeck. He is as I said a…
Pit foreman. You said. But you have not said why you want to chat with him.
Take a look at your boots.
Geralt and Cahir obediently looked at their shoes which were covered in a strange reddish colored mud. The half-elf you seek Angouleme answered the question before they could ask it was at the meeting with Nightingale with the very same reddish dirt on his shoes. Get it now?
Now yes. And the dwarf?
You shouldnt respond all the time. For variety you should try keeping quiet every once in a while – it makes for a grim countenance.
They had no trouble making their way through the mining camp. Some of the miners looked at them and then quickly looked away; others remained frozen with their mouths open. Anyone that was in their way quickly moved aside. Geralt could imagine why. His face still shone and Cahirs was still covered in stains bruises scratches and scrapes – the scenic remnants of the fight and the beating Milva had given them. So they looked like individuals who enjoyed cutting each other in the face and who would also not take long to polish the face of a third person.
The dwarf Angoulemes friend stood beside a carpentry building painting an inscription on something like a blackboard which was cobbled together from two planed boards. He noticed the three and put away his brush set his paint bucket aside and looked at them from under lowered brows. His physiognomy ornamented by a speckled beard was suddenly painted in utter amazement. Angouleme?
Hello Drosdeck.
Is that you? The dwarf opened his bearded mouth. Is that really you?
No. Its not me. Its the newly resurrected prophet Marjoram. Dont ask silly questions Golan. For a change you could act a little wiser.
Dont joke Bright. I never expected to see you again. Mauleslin was here five days ago and he told me that they caught you and put you to the stake in Riedbrune. He swore it was the truth!
Well thats a good thing. The girl shrugged her shoulders. Now if Mauleslin ever wants to borrow money from you and swears that he will give it back then youll know what his oath is worth.
I already knew that the dwarf replied then blinked rapidly and twitched his nose just like a rabbit. I wouldnt lend him a penny if they were falling from the sky. But the fact that youre alive and safe makes me happy ha that makes me glad! Maybe you will even pay your debt to me?
Perhaps. Who knows?
And who do you have here with you Bright?
Good friends.
Well you look good but…where are the gods leading you?
As usual Im going astray. Ignoring the threatening eyes of the witcher she drew a pinch of Fisstech sniffed it through her nose and rubbed the rest into her gums. You sniff Golan?
Well. The dwarf held out his hand and pulled a pinch of the narcotic into his nose.
In truth the girl continued Ill probably go into Belhaven. Do you know where Nightingale and the Hanse are?
Golan Drosdeck cocked his head. You Bright should stay out of Nightingales way. They say hes as mad at you as a wolverine when woken in the winter.
Whoa! Even after he heard that two horses pulled me onto a sharpened stake? Didnt he feel sorry? Hasnt he shed any tears?
Absolutely not. He supposedly said now Angouleme got what we knew all along she must – a pole in the ass.
Well what a boor. A vulgar bastard. The governor Fulk would say dregs of society. But I say dregs of the cloaca!
Something you should rather say behind his back Bright. And do not loiter in the area of Belhaven make a detour around the city. And if you must to go into town go in disguise…
Dont teach a grandfather to cough Golan.
I wouldnt dare.
Look dwarf. Angouleme braced her boot against one of the steps to carpentry. Im going to ask you a question. Do not hurry to respond – think twice before you answer.
Ask.
Have you by chance recently come across a certain half-elf? A stranger not from here?
Golan Drosdeck inhaled air sneezed vigorously and wiped his nose on his wrist. A half-elf you say? Whats a half-elf?
Dont be stupid Drosdeck. The one Nightingale hired for the special job. To get rid of someone. A certain witcher…
A witcher? Golan Drosdeck smiled and lifted his board up off the floor. Imagine that! Fact is we are looking for a witcher – thats why weve been painting these signs and hanging them in the area. Look here: Looking for Witcher good pay plus room and board Inquire for details with the management of the mine LITTLE BABETTE. How do you spell details? With an ai or ei?
Write: particulars. And why do you need a witcher in the mine?
What a question. What else if not for monsters?
Like what?
Knockers and Barbegazi. They are all over the place on the lower levels of the mine.
Angouleme threw a glance at Geralt who confirmed with a nod that he knew what they were. Then he gave her a meaningful cough letting her know that he wanted to get back to business.
So back to business. The girl had understood instantly. What do you know of that half-elf?
I do not know of any half-elf.
I told you to think twice.
Ive done just that. Golan Drosdeck gave her a sly look. And I think that it is not worth it for me to know something on this matter.
What does…?
It means that it is restless. The terrain is restless and the days are restless. Gangs Nilfgaardians the freedom fighters of the Free North Case… and various foreign elements half-elves. Each one is eager to cause trouble…
What does…? Angouleme wrinkled her nose.
It means that you owe me money Bright. Instead of returning it you want to add new debt. Significant debt – because what you ask can get a person a blow to the head and not with bare fists but with a pickaxe. What do I get? Does it pay for me to know something about this half-elf eh? Do I get anything for it? It seems there are only risks and no reward…
Geralt had heard enough. The conversation bored him and neither the jargon nor manner appealed to him. With a swift movement he seized the dwarfs beard pulled it towards him and then shoved him back. Golan Drosdeck tripped over the bucket of paint and fell. The witcher leaped on him put a knee to his chest and shoved a knife in front of his sparkling eyes. Your reward he growled will be that youll get away from here with your life. Start talking.
Golans eyes darted all around from the caves to the walkways.
Talk repeated Geralt. Tell me what you know. Otherwise Ill cut your throat so that youll drown before you bleed to death…
RIALTO… groaned the dwarf. In the mine named RIALTO…
Only minor details distinguished the mine RIALTO from LITTLE BABETTE as well as the other mines and surface-mines that Angouleme Geralt and Cahir passed by – THE SPRING MANIFESTO ALTERZ NEUERZ APRIL FOOLS DULCINELLA COMMON CAUSE and HAPPY HOLE. Work was in full swing in all of them – muddy earth was brought out of tunnels or shafts poured into troughs and washed in sieves. All of them had plenty of the characteristic red mud.
RIALTO was a large ore mine near the summit of the hill. The summit was cut off and formed an open pit. The filtration camp was actually on a terrace cut into the mountainside. Next to the tunnel mouths which gaped in the vertical mountainside were troughs sieves gutters and other accessories of mining. It was a true settlement of wooden huts bark-covered huts shacks and sheds.
I dont know anyone the girl said as she firmly tied her reins to a fence. But we will try to talk to the manager. Geralt if you can help it do not immediately grab him by the throat and threaten him with a knife. Lets talk first…
Dont teach a grandfather to cough Angouleme.
They did not talk. They did not even have to go to the building that they suspected was the managers office. In a small square where ore was loaded on wagons they met five riders.
Oh damn said Angouleme. Oh damn. Look what the wind just blew in.
What is it?
Those are Nightingales people. Theyve come to collect the protection money. Theyve already seen and recognized me… fucking shit! Now were sitting in the soup…
Can you deceive them? murmured Cahir.
I dont think so.
Because?
I robbed Nightingale when I fled from the Hanse. They do not forgive… but Ill try. You stay silent. Keep your eyes open and be ready. For anything.
The mounted riders came closer. Two rode in the lead – a graying long-haired man wearing a wolf fur and a young lanky man with a beard which he had apparently grown to conceal pimple scars. Geralt noticed the flash of concealed hatred in their eyes when they looked at Angouleme.
Bright.
Novosad. Yirrel. Greetings. Beautiful day today. Just a pity that its raining.
The Grayhair dismounted or more precisely jumped from the saddle throwing his right leg over his horses neck with a flourish. The others also dismounted. As he walked closer the Grayhair handed his reins to Yirrel – the beanpole with the beard.
So he said our talkative goose. As it turns out youre alive and healthy?
And still kicking.
Reckless brat! Rumor has it that you kicked but while on the pole. Rumor has it that One-Eyed Fulk caught you. Rumor has it that you sang like a lark on the rack and betrayed us all when they asked!
Rumor has it snapped Angouleme that your mother Novosad demands that her customers pay her four pennies but still no one will give her more than two.
The robber spat contemptuously at her feet.
Again Angouleme snapped just like a cat. Novosad she said boldly putting her hands on her hips. I have business to discuss with Nightingale.
Interesting. He has business to discuss with you as well.
Shut up and listen for as long as I feel like talking. Two days ago a mile away from Riedbrune these two friends of mine and I made cold the witcher the one Nightingale had the job for. Do you understand?
Novosad looked at his mates meaningfully then straightened his gloves and looked at Geralt and Cahir appraisingly. Your new friends he repeated slowly. Ha I can see by their visages that they are not priests. They killed the witcher you say? How? With a stab in the back? Or while he was asleep?
Thats a minor detail. Angouleme made a wry face like a monkey. An important detail however is that said witcher has bitten the dust. I dont want to mess with Nightingale dont want to drive his parade. But business is business. The half-elf gave you an advance – which I dont care about – thats your money for expenses and effort. But the second installment which the half-elf promised after work was done is mine by rights.
By rights?
Yes! Angouleme ignored his sarcastic tone. Because we have fulfilled the contract and killed the witcher and we can prove it to the half-elf. Ill take whats mine and disappear into the blue and misty distance. With Nightingale as I said I do not want to compete. There is not enough room on the North Case for the two of us. Convey this to him Novosad.
Is that all? he asked with venomous sarcasm.
And kisses growled Angouleme. You can kiss my ass in his place by proxy.
I think Novosad announced as he glanced at his companions that I should bring your ass to him in person Angouleme. I Angouleme am going to bring you to him in chains so he can talk to you and clarify everything. And settle. Everything. The question of who is entitled to the money from the contract with the half-elf Schirru. The payment for what you stole. And also that there is not enough space on the Northern Case for the both of you. In this way everything is settled. Every detail.
Theres one little problem. Angouleme dropped her hands. How do you plan to take me to Nightingale Novosad?
Oops! The bandit stretched out his hand. By the throat!
With a lightning-fast movement Geralt moved his Sihil under Novosads nose. I would not advise that he growled.
Novosad jumped back and drew his sword. With a hiss Yirrel tore a scimitar from the sheath on his back. The others followed their example.
I would not advise that repeated the witcher.
Novosad cursed. He looked at his companions. He was weak in arithmetic but he still came to the conclusion that five was much more than three. At them! he screamed and threw himself at Geralt. Kill them!
The witcher dodged the blow with a half spin and hit him just below the temple. Even before Novosad fell Angouleme made a throwing motion – a knife whizzed through the air and the attacking Yirrel staggered a bone handle jutting out from under his chin. The bandit dropped his sword and tore the knife out with both hands. Blood poured from his throat as Angouleme jumped up and kicked him in the chest knocking him to the ground. Meanwhile Geralt had cut down another bandit. Cahir gave one mighty blow with his Nilfgaardian sword and the head of a bandit fell somewhat in the shape of a portion of melon. The last bandit retreated and jumped on his horse. Cahir heaved up his sword grabbed it by the blade and threw it like a spear. It hit the robber right between the shoulder blades. The horse whinnied tossed its head and fell to its knees then began to stomp and drag the corpse whose hands were still clutching the bridle strap through the red mud.
Everything had happened in no more than five heartbeats.
Peeeople! someone screamed between the buildings. Peeooplee! Heeelp! Murder murder they murdered them!
Army! Get the military! shouted another mountain man while he drove back the children who had appeared – in accordance with the ancient custom of all children from the beginning of time – to gape and stand in peoples way.
Someone should run get the Military!
Angouleme picked up her knife wiped it and put it in her boot. Leave off please! she shouted back while she looked around. Are you blind you mountain miner or what? That was self-defense! The crooks attacked us! Didnt you notice? Plus didnt you notice they were evil? Havent they extorted protection money from some of you?
She sneezed violently. She pulled the bag from the still-twitching Novosads belt and then bent over Yirrel.
Angouleme.
What?
Stop it.
Why? This is loot! Do you have too much money?
Angouleme…
Hey you a sonorous voice suddenly said. Come here a moment.
There were three men in the open door of a building that served as a tool shed. Two were musclemen with low-cut hair low foreheads and certainly lower intelligence. The third – the one that had called them – was an unusually tall dark-haired handsome man.
I couldnt help but hear the discussion that preceded the commotion the man said. I didnt believe that you had killed the witcher I thought it was an empty boast. But I do not think that anymore. Come in here into the building.
Angouleme gave an audible gasp. She looked at the witcher and nodded almost imperceptibly.
The man was a half-elf.
The half-elf Schirru was tall. He measured over six feet. He wore his long dark hair in a pony tail which fell down his back. His eyes betrayed his mixed blood – large almond-shaped and greenish-yellow like a cats.
So you have killed the witcher he repeated with a dirty smile. And you did it sooner than Homer Straggen called Nightingale? Interesting interesting. In short I should pay you fifty florens. The second installment. So Straggen got his fifty for free. Because I doubt that you could get him to hand it over to you.
How I deal with Nightingale is my business said Angouleme who was sitting on a crate letting her legs dangle. The contract regarding the witcher is your business. And we have done this thing. We not Nightingale. The witcher is dead. His cronies all three are dead. So the contract is fulfilled.
At least you claim he is dead?
Angouleme kept dangling her legs. When Im old she said in her usual brash tone Ill write the story of my life. In it Ill describe what transpired with all the details. Until then youll have to wait Mr. Schirru.
So you are embarrassed coldly observed the half-breed because you killed him insidiously and deviously.
Does that bother you? Geralt said. Schirru looked at him cautiously.
No he said after a moment. The witcher Geralt of Rivia deserved no better fate. He was a naive fool and an idiot. If hed had a better more decent honorable death there would have been legends made about him. But he deserves no legends.
One death is the same as any other.
Not always. The half-elf shook his head trying all the time to look into Geralts eyes which were hidden in the shadow of his hood. I assure you not always. I guess you were the one that dealt the fatal blow.
Geralt did not answer. He felt an overwhelming desire to grab the half-breed by the ponytail throw him to the ground extract everything he knew from him and then kick him until every tooth had been knocked out of his head. He restrained himself. The voice of reason told him that the mystification invented by Angouleme could produce better results.
As you will said Schirru as he waited in vain for a reply. I will not insist on receiving a detailed report of the event. Clearly you do not want to talk about it so its obvious that nothing happened that one could boast of. Unless of course your silence is for an entirely different reason… for example – that nothing has happened. Do you perhaps have any evidence of the truth of your words?
We cut off the dead witchers right hand Angouleme replied calmly. But it was later stolen and eaten by a raccoon.
That was not the only thing we took Geralt slowly fumbled under his shirt and pulled out his wolfs head medallion. The witcher wore this around his neck.
Please.
Geralt did not hesitate long.
The half-elf weighed the medallion in his hand. Now I believe it he said slowly. This trinket emanates strong magic. Only a witcher could have such a thing.
And a witcher concluded Angouleme would not give it away even if his life depended on it. It is irrefutable proof. So dear Lord place the reward on the table.
Schirru tucked the medallion away carefully pulled a bundle of papers from his pocket placed them on the table and smoothed them with his hand. Please.
Angouleme jumped off the crate and approached wiggling her hips ridiculously. She leaned across the table – and Schirru quickly grabbed her by the hair threw her on the table and held a knife to her throat. The girl could not even cry.
Geralt and Cahir had their swords in their hands. But too late.
The half-elfs cronies the musclemen with low foreheads already had iron hooks in their hands. And they did not hesitate to come closer.
Swords on the floor growled Schirru. Both swords on the floor. Or else I will widen the girls smile.
Dont… Angouleme began and ended with a scream as the half-elfs clawed fist yanked her hair. He scratched her skin with his dagger and a brilliant crimson thread ran from the girls neck.
Swords away! Im serious!
Maybe we can communicate? Geralt ignored the rapidly rising fury inside him. He had decided to play the part for the time being. Like civilized people?
The half-elf gave a toxic smile. Communicate? With you witcher? I was sent here to kill you not to communicate with you. Yes yes you mutant. You came in here and wove your lies but I immediately recognized you from the first moment. Youve been described to me in detail. Can you guess who has described you so accurately? Who has given me precise instructions on where and in what kind of company I will find you? Oh Im sure you can guess.
Let the girl go.
But I know you not only from description continued Schirru who had no intention of letting Angouleme go. Ive seen you before. I was even on your trail once. In Temeria. In July. I followed you to the town of Dorian. To the legal offices of Codringher and Fenn. Can you imagine that?
Geralt turned his sword so that light from the blade reflected into the half-elfs eyes. I wonder he said coldly how are you going to get out of this stalemate Schirru. I see two ways out. First you let go of the girl. Second you kill the girl… And a moment later your blood is spread nicely over the walls and ceiling.
You have until the count of three – Schirru brutally tore Angoulemes hair – to lay your weapons on the ground. Then I start to cut the girl.
Well see how far you get with the cutting. I think not far.
One!
Two! Geralt began his own count and whirled his Sihil.
From outside they heard shouts and the sounds of horses stamping neighing and snorting.
And now what? Schirru smiled. Ive been expecting them. This is not a stalemate but a checkmate! My friends have arrived.
Really? said Cahir looking out the window. I see the uniforms of the Imperial Light Horse.
So its a checkmate but not for you said Geralt. Youve lost Schirru. Let the girl go.
No way.
The door was kicked open and a dozen people stormed in mostly black-uniformed and homogeneous. They were led by a light-haired bearded man wearing an epaulet inscribed with a silver bear.
Que aen sueccs? he asked menacingly. Whats going on here? Who is responsible for this carnage? For the bodies out there? Tell me now!
Sir…
Glaeddyvan vort! Put your swords away! They obeyed because there were crossbows aimed at them. Angouleme released by Schirru tried to run from the table but was suddenly grabbed by a burly colorfully-dressed man whose eyes bulged out like a frogs. She wanted to scream but the man pressed his gloved fist in her mouth.
We avoid violence Geralt coldly told the leader with the bear. We are not criminals.
Well is that so?
We act with knowledge and consent of Lord Fulk Artevelde the governor of Riedbrune.
Well is that also so? repeated Bear as he gestured for Geralts and Cahirs swords to be taken away. With the knowledge and consent of Lord Fulk Artevelde. The Honorable Artevelde. Did you hear that boys?
His people – as joyous as the black color they wore – burst into roars of laughter.
Angouleme tossed herself back and forth in the grip of Frogman trying in vain to scream. It was not necessary. Geralt understood. Even before the smiling Schirru began to shake hands with Bear. Even before four black Nilfgaardians grabbed Cahir and three others pointed their crossbows directly at Geralts face.
The Frogman still holding Angouleme joined his companions. The girl was hanging in his grasp like a rag doll. She did not even try to resist.
Bear slowly approached Geralt and then suddenly delivered a blow with his gauntleted hand to the witchers crotch. Geralt bowed but did not fall. Cold fury kept him on his legs.
Perhaps it will please you to hear said Bear that you are not the first idiot that One-Eyed Fulk took advantage of for his own purposes. I run a lucrative business with Mr. Homer Straggen here known as the Nightingale to some. Fulk is outraged that I run such a business and that I have appointed Homer Straggen to the Imperial Service as the leader of an infantry company to protect the mining industry. Since he cannot officially take revenge he hires several rags to act in his stead.
And a witcher added a wickedly-grinning Schirru.
Outside Bear said aloud five bodies lie in the rain. You have killed people who were in the Imperial Service! You have disturbed the work of the mines! I have no doubt you are spies saboteurs and terrorists. The law of war rules this territory. Under martial law I hereby condemn you to death.
The Frogman laughed out loud. He pinned down Angouleme and attacked her chest with a rapid movement. And squeezed firmly.
And now Bright? he croaked – his voice proved to be even more frog-like than his eyes. If the bandit had given himself his nickname it was evidence of a sense of humor. But if he should ever need a disguise the pseudonym provided an extremely effective one.
So we meet again! Nightingale croaked again as he pinched Angoulemes chest. Are you happy?
The girl moaned in pain.
Where did you whore the gems and stones you stole from me?
Fulk confiscated a number of entities when I was taken into custody! shouted Angouleme and tried unsuccessfully to give the impression that she was not afraid. Sign up with him if you want to collect them!
Nightingale croaked and his eyes bulged – he now looked almost completely like a frog – all that was missing was for him to begin to catch flies with his tongue. He bear-hugged Angouleme and began to throw her back and forth. She groaned in pain. Through the red mist of anger in Geralts eyes the girl began again to resemble Ciri.
Grab them Bear said impatiently. Take them outside.
This is a witcher said one of the bandits from Nightingales mining protection company uncertainly. A dangerous type! How can we grab him with our bare hands? He could hit us with some magic or something…
Dont worry Schirru patted his bag with a smile. He cant do magic without his witchers amulet and I have his amulet. Grab him.
Outside more armed Nilfgaardians in black coats waited alongside the colorful bandits of Nightingales Hanse. A group of miners had gathered. The omnipresent dogs and children swarmed around.
Nightingale suddenly lost control of himself. As if the devil had entered into him. He angrily croaked at Angouleme punched her and as she fell kicked her several times. Geralt writhed in the grip of bandits earning him a blow on his neck from something hard.
It was said Nightingale croaked and hopped to and fro like a crazed toad over Angouleme that they had placed a stake in your ass in Riedbrune you little slut! It seems they could predict the future! Because you will die at the stake! Hey boys find me a pole somewhere! Hurry up!
Mr. Straggen – Bear frowned – I have no reason to have fun with a time-consuming and bestial-looking execution. The prisoners will simply be hung…
He was silenced by the evil frog eyes.
Just be quiet Captain croaked the bandit. I pay you too much to make such inappropriate remarks to me. I promised Angouleme a bad death so now Im going to play with her. If you want then hang the other two. I dont care about them.
But I do interrupted Schirru. I need them both. Above all the witcher. Above all him. And since it will take some time to put the girl on the pole I will also use this time.
He stepped closer and fixed his cats eyes on Geralt.
You should know mutant he said that I was there when your friend Codringher was killed in Dorian. I acted on the orders of my master Master Vilgefortz whom I have served for years. I slit him open with my knife. And that disgusting little monster Fenn – I lit him in the midst of his own papers and roasted him. I could have stabbed him easily but I waited a while to listen to him howl and squeal. And he howled and squealed I tell you like a stuck pig. There was nothing absolutely nothing human in that howling.
Do you know why Im telling you all this? Because I could just as easily stab you or allow you to be stabbed. But Im going to devote a little time and effort. Ill listen to you cry. You said that one death is like any other? Youll soon see that not every death is alike. Boys ignite the tar in the lubricator. And bring some chain.
With a dull thud something burst against the corner of the building and immediately exploded into flames with a terrible roar.
The second stone vessel filled with oil – Geralt recognized the smell – hit the lubricator and the third burst next to the men holding the horses. It popped and hissed flames and the horses panicked. It caused chaos flames shot everywhere and dogs howled. One of Nightingales bandits suddenly spread out his arms and splashed in the mud with an arrow in his back.
Long live the Free North Case!
On the summit of the hill and along the scaffolds and catwalks silhouettes darted in gray robes and fur-trimmed caps. More and more incendiary bombs flew down on humans horses and the shacks. The braids of fire and smoke began to spread. Two landed in a workshop on the wood shavings and sawdust-covered floor.
Long live the Free North Case! Death to the Nilfgaardian invaders!
Feathered arrows and bolts began to buzz.
One of the black Nilfgaardians fell under the horses one of Nightingales bandits was shot through the throat and one of the short-haired musclemen fell to the ground with a bolt in his neck. With a ghoulish moan Bear fell. An arrow had struck him in the chest under the breastbone – his gorget was not enough protection. The arrow – although no one could know this – had been stolen from a military transport and was a slightly reworked version of the standard arrow of the imperial army. The broad two-edged tip had been sawed in several places so it splintered on impact.
The arrowhead tore Bears guts apart very nicely.
One of the children was rolling in the red mud pierced by an arrow that had been shot by one of the less-accurate freedom fighters. One of the men holding Geralt was killed. And one of those who held Angouleme. The girl broke away from the other quickly drew a knife from her boot and cut with a sweeping motion. In her haste she missed Nightingales throat but made a pretty slit on his cheek almost to the teeth. Nightingale cried instead of croaking and his eyes almost bulged out of his head. He sank to his knees as blood gushed between the hands with which he held his face. Angouleme howled like a madman and rushed up to him to finish the thing but was not able to because the next bomb exploded between her and Nightingale spraying fire and stinking of smoke.
Hissing flames raged all around – already a fiery pandemonium reigned. Horses stamped whinnied and reared up. Nilfgaardians and bandits screamed. Miners ran into each other confused – some were fleeing others trying to extinguish the burning buildings.
Geralt had already picked up Sihil from a fallen Nilfgaardian. He put a cut across the forehead of a tall woman in chain mail who had just raised her arm to strike Angouleme with a morning star. The next a black Nilfgaardian came running at him with a lance and Geralt hit him in the thigh. He slit the throat of the next who just stood in the way.
Directly beside him a singed panic-blinded horse knocked down and trampled another child.
Catch a horse! Catch a horse! Cahir was standing beside him; together they created a sweeping sword-strike area. Geralt did not listen to him did not look at him. He went to the next Nilfgaardian looking for Schirru.
Angouleme on her knees shot a crossbow bolt three feet away into the abdomen of one of the bandits from the company that was supposed to protect the mining industry. Then she jumped up and grabbed the reins of a horse passing nearby.
Catch one cried Cahir. And get out of here!
With an overhead blow the witcher split the next Nilfgaardian from sternum to the waist. He jerked his head and hurled the blood off his eyebrows and eyelashes. Schirru! Where are you bastard?
A blow. A scream. Warm droplets on his face.
Mercy! wailed a man in a black uniform who was kneeling in the mud. The witcher hesitated.
Come to your senses! roared Cahir grabbing him by the shoulders and shaking him vigorously. Come to your senses! Have you lost your mind?
Angouleme came galloping back pulling the bridle of another horse with her. Two riders pursued her. One fell struck by an arrow of a freedom fighter of the North Case. Geralts sword swept the other from the saddle.
Geralt jumped. And then in the firelight he saw Schirru in the midst of the screaming panicking remnants of the Nilfgaardians. Beside the half-elf Nightingale croaked and cursed looking like a man-eating troll with his bloody face.
Geralt roared in anger turned his horse and whirled his sword.
Next to him Cahir cried began to curse and reeled in his saddle blood running spilling from his forehead and instantly covering his eyes and face. Geralt! Help!
Schirru had gathered a group around him shouting ordering them to shoot their crossbows. Geralt struck his horses bottom with the flat of his blade ready for a suicidal attack. Schirru had to die. Everything else was irrelevant. Nothing else mattered. Cahir did not matter. Angouleme did not matter…
Geralt! shouted Angouleme. Help Cahir!
He came to his senses. And he was ashamed.
He reached for Cahir and supported him.
Cahir wiped the blood from his face with his sleeve but the blood once again flowed down it. Its nothing a scratch… His voice trembled. Get out of here witcher… gallop after Angouleme… gallop!
Loud cries sounded from the foot of the hill – a crowd approached armed with pickaxes crowbars and hatchets. The fellows and companions of the miners of RIALTO had come to help – the miners from the adjacent mines – from HAPPY HOLE or THE COMMON CAUSE or from some other. Who could know?
Geralt kicked his heels into his horses flanks. They went in an insane gallop terre à ventre.
They rushed forward without looking back clinging to the necks of their horses. The best horse had fallen to Angouleme a bandits small but spirited animal. Geralts horse a bay stallion with a Nilfgaardian bridle began to wheeze and gasp and had trouble even keeping its head up. Cahirs horse also from the military was stronger and more enduring but that made no difference because its rider was troubled. He reeled in his saddle instinctively pressed his thighs together and sprayed blood on the neck and mane of his mount. But he galloped on.
Angouleme who had left behind the two waited for them in a bend in the road at the place where it went downhill between a wall of rocks.
The pursuers she panted with dirt smeared on her face. They are repositioning themselves they will not leave us in peace… The miners have seen where we fled. We cannot stay on the road… We need to dive into the woods where there are no paths… They depend on…
No said the witcher in an alarmed voice hearing the broken sounds from his horses lungs. We must stay on the road… On the direct and shortest route to Sansretour…
Why?
Now is not the time to talk. Forward! Get everything you can out of the horses…
They galloped. The witchers bay stallion gasped.
The bay was not fit to continue riding. His feet were stiff as sticks he could barely walk his flanks were heavy and the air came out of him with a hoarse groan. Finally he fell to his side laid stiff looked at the horsemen and his reproachful eyes became cloudy.
Cahirs horse was in slightly better condition but Cahir was in even worse. He fell down from his saddle and picked himself up but only on all fours. He vomited violently although he did not have much left to throw up.
When Geralt and Angouleme tried to touch his bloody head he cried out.
Damn said the girl they ruined his haircut.
A considerable length of the skin over the forehead and temple of the young Nilfgaardian was replaced by skull bones. If the blood had not already formed an adhesive the loose skin would have folded down to his ear. The sight was grim.
How did this happen?
He simply had an axe thrown at his head. And the funniest thing is it was neither a black nor any of Nightingales men but one of the miners.
It does not matter who it was the witcher wrapped Cahirs head tightly with a torn shirt sleeve. What is important and fortunate is that the thrower had lousy aim and only scalped him or else he would have a split skull. But the skull bone has still taken some hurt. And the brain has noticed as well. He could not keep himself in the saddle even if the horse could carry his burden.
What do we do? Your horse is dead his is as good as dead and the sweat drips from mine… and we are pursued. We cannot stay here…
We have to stay here. Cahir and I. And Cahirs horse. You continue riding. Quickly. Your horse is strong it will withstand the gallop. And even if you have to ride it to death… Angouleme somewhere in the Sansretour Valley Regis Milva and Dandelion are waiting for us. They know nothing and could fall into Schirrus hands. You have to find and warn them and then all four of you ride for Toussaint. They will not pursue you there. Hopefully.
And you and Cahir? Angouleme bit her lip. What will become of you? Nightingale is not stupid and if he sees the half-dead bay hell ransack every hole in the area! And you cannot go far with Cahir!
Schirru because he is the one who follows us will ride after you.
You think so?
Im sure. Ride.
What should I tell the aunt when I show up without you?
You explain it. But not to her only to Regis. Regis will know what to do. And we… If Cahirs scalp adheres more firmly to his skull then we will walk to Toussaint. We will find you there somehow. Well dont wait around girl. To the horse and away. Do not let the pursuers reach you. Do not let them catch sight of you.
Dont teach a grandfather to cough! Hang on! Until then!
Until then Angouleme.
He did not move too far away from the road. He could not resist taking a look at their pursuers. But he basically feared no action on their part because he knew that they wouldnt waste any time and would follow Angouleme.
He was not mistaken.
The riders passed by less than a quarter of an hour later. Although they shouted argued and rummaged through the bushes near the sight of the horse lying they almost immediately took to the road again. They had undoubtedly come to the conclusion that the three fugitives were now riding two on a horse and that they could catch them quickly if they lost no time. Geralt saw that some of the pursuers horses were not in the best condition.
There were very few black-coated Nilfgaardian light cavalry among the pursuers; it was dominated by Nightingales brightly-clothed bandits. Geralt couldnt make out whether Nightingale himself participated in the pursuit or whether he had cleaned and bandaged his slashed face.
As the sound of hooves faded into the distance Geralt got out of his hiding place in the bracken lifted the moaning and groaning Cahir and held him steady. The horse is too weak to carry you. Can you walk?
The Nilfgaardian made a sound that could just as easily have been confirmation as denial. Or something else. But he set one foot in front of the other and thats what mattered.
They went down into a ravine into a stream bed. Cahir fell down the last dozen steps on the slippery slope pretty desolate as he slipped down. He crawled to the stream drank plenty of water and poured some over his bandaged head. The witcher did not urge him to hurry – he just breathed a deep breath gathering strength.
They went up the creek where he assisted Cahir and simultaneously pulled the horse to be. They trudged through the water placing their feet against rocks and fallen logs. After a while Cahir could go no further – he no longer obediently put one foot in front of the other he no longer moved the witcher had to drag him. They could not go on like this especially as the stream bed was interrupted by waterfalls and rapids. Geralt groaned and carried the wounded man on his back. The horse that he towed along behind him did not make his life any easier either. When they finally came out of the ravine the witcher collapsed on the wet forest floor and lay breathing heavily completely exhausted beside the groaning Cahir. He lay there a long time. In the back of his knee an angry pain began to throb.
Cahir finally showed some signs of life and shortly afterwards – miraculously – he stood up cursed himself and held his head. They continued on. Initially Cahir moved quickly. Then he slowed down. Then he fell.
Geralt took turns carrying him on his back and dragging him groaning pushing against rocks. Pain raged in his knee and black and fiery bees swarmed in his vision.
A month ago… Cahir began to moan from his back. Who would have thought that you would be carrying me on your back…
Be quiet Nilfgaardian… dont waste your strength talking…
When they finally reached the rocks and cliffs it was almost dark. The witcher had not dared hoped to find a cave yet he found one – he dropped powerlessly in the first available hole.
The cavern was littered with a sole human skull ribs pelvis and other bones. But – more importantly – there were also dry branches.
Cahir had a fever and was shaking and twitching in spasms. He bravely and confidently endured the suturing of the flap of skin done with the aid of a curved needle and thread. The crisis came later in the night. Geralt decided to kindle a fire in the cave ignoring the security issue. It was raining and storming outside so it was hardly likely that someone roamed the area watching for firelight. And Cahir had to warm up.
He was feverish all night. He trembled and groaned. He was delirious. Geralt could not sleep – he had to keep the fire going. And his knee ached with demonic pain.
The young Nilfgaardian became stronger and stronger as the morning approached. He was pale and covered in sweat and Geralt could feel the heat he gave off. His articulation was slightly impeded by his chattering teeth. But he spoke. And he spoke with confidence. He complained of a headache – a normal occurrence for someone who had been hit in the head with an axe and had the skin along with the hair severed from his head.
Geralt divided his time between dawns and restless evenings gathering trickling rainwater from the rocks and birch bark bowls. Both Cahir and he were tormented by thirst.
Geralt?
Yes.
Cahir straightened the logs in the fire with the help of a leg bone he had found.
In the mine as we fought… I was scared you know?
I know.
For a moment it looked as if you had gone berserk. As if nothing mattered to you… except for killing…
I know.
I feared concluded Cahir quietly that you would in your state you would kill Schirru. And from the dead we could not gather any information.
Geralt cleared his throat. He liked the young Nilfgaardian more and more. Not only was he brave but also intelligent.
Youve done well to send Angouleme away continued Cahir rattling his teeth lightly. This is not for girls… Even for those like her. This we need to do for ourselves as a pair. We are chasing the consequences. But not to kill in a berserker state. You think this is for revenge… Geralt revenge must not be our purpose. We need to capture this half-elf… force him to tell us where Ciri is…
Ciri is no longer alive.
Thats not true. I do not believe she is dead… and you do not believe it either. Admit it.
I do not believe it.
Outside the storm howled and the rain roared. Inside the cave it was snug. Geralt?
Im listening.
Ciri lives. I had another dream… Yes something happened at the equinox something fatal… Yes no doubt I also felt and saw… But she lives… She absolutely lives. We must hurry… but not to revenge and murder. To her.
Yes. Yes Cahir. Youre right.
And you? Have you had any more dreams?
Yes said the witcher bitterly. But very rarely since we crossed the Yaruga. And I cannot remember them at all after waking. Something inside me has stopped Cahir. Something has burned. Something inside me has been torn completely…
Thats okay Geralt. I dream enough for the both of us.
They journeyed forth at dawn. It had stopped raining it even looked as if the sun was trying to find some hole in the gray clouds that covered the sky.
They rode slowly together on a horse with a Nilfgaardian military bridle.
The horse stumbled on the gravel but did better on the steps along the shores of Sansretour River which led to Toussaint. Geralt knew the way. He had been here once before. Much had changed. However much had not changed – the brook in the Sansretour Valley still gradually more and more became the Sansretour River. The Amell Mountains still towered above them along with Gorgon the Devils Mountain.
There were some things that simply never changed.
A soldier does not question commands said Cahir as he touched the bandage on his head. He does not analyze them he does not think about them and he does not expect an explanation of their meaning. This is the first thing they taught us soldiers. So you can you guess that I did not hesitate to follow the command that was given to me. Not even a fleeting thought in my head questioned why I should be looking for some Cintrierin princess. Orders are orders. Of course I was annoyed because I wanted to win fame with the knighthood with the regular army… But working for the Intelligence Service is also an honor for us. If only it had been a more difficult task to capture some important prisoners… But a girl?
Geralt threw the backbone of a trout into their camp fire. They had caught many fish the evening before in a creek that emptied into the Sansretour. The trout were in the spawning season and light.
He listened to Cahirs story his curiosity struggling against a deep sense of regret.
All in all it was a coincidence said Cahir while gazing into the fire. The purest coincidence. We had as I later learned a spy in the court of Cintra a chamberlain. As we were about to conquer the city and were preparing to besiege the castle this spy slipped out and hinted that they would try to smuggle the princess out of town. There were several groups formed just like mine. My group randomly encountered Ciri.
It began with a chase through the city quarters which were already burning. That was a real hell. Nothing but the hiss of the flames and fire walls. The horses did not want to continue and neither did the people. My subordinates there were four began to curse scream and think I had lost my mind and would lead them to destruction… I barely managed with great difficulty to keep them under control.
We continued to pursue the escapees through this boiling fire and caught up to them. Suddenly we had them right in front of us – five Cintrierins. And then they began to cut and thrust even before I could call that they should surrender the girl. The one who carried her on his saddle fell first and she landed on the ground. One of my men picked her up and pulled her onto his horse but he did not get far because one of the Cintrierins stabbed him in the back all the way through his body. I saw the sword protrude an inch from Ciris head and she fell again to the ground. She was almost fainting from fear. I saw how she was pressed to the slain and tried to crawl under them… Like a kitten with a dead cat…
He paused and swallowed saliva. She did not even know that she clung to an enemy. To a comparatively hated Nilfgaardian.
We were alone he continued after a short pause she and I and all around nothing but corpses and fire. Ciri began creeping into the puddles of water and blood but they had already begun to steam strongly. A house collapsed I saw sparks and smoke then could hardly see anything. The horse did not want to go there. I called out to her and asked her to come to me yelling myself hoarse trying to be heard over the fires roar. She saw and heard me but did not react. The horse would not move forward and I couldnt help it. I had to dismount. I held my hand out to pick her up but with the other I had to hold the reins. The horse pulled on them so violently that he nearly knocked me over. When I picked her up she began to scream. Then she stiffened and fainted. I wrapped her in a coat that had been soaked in a puddle of mud filth and blood. And away we rode. Straight through the fire.
I do not know by what miracle we found our way out of there. But we suddenly emerged and found ourselves at the river. Unfortunately at the place where the Nordlings were fleeing. I threw away my officers helmet because even though the wings were burned they would have immediately recognized me. The rest of my uniform was so scorched that it could not betray me. But if the girl would have regained consciousness and would have screamed they would have massacred me. I was lucky.
I rode a mile with them then stayed behind and hid in the bushes next to the river which constantly carried corpses by.
He paused cleared his throat and felt his bandaged head with both hands. And he blushed. Or perhaps it was only the reflection of the flames?
Ciri was terribly dirty. I had to clean her… She did not resist did not scream. She trembled her eyes were closed. Every time I touched her to wash or dry she tensed and stiffened… I knew I should talk to her and she might calm down… But suddenly I could not find any words in your language… In the language of my mother which Ive known since childhood. I could not find any words so I wanted to calm her down by contact by gentleness… but she stiffened and whimpered… as a young bird…
She had nightmares about that whispered Geralt.
I know. Me too.
What was next?
She fell asleep. And I also. From exhaustion. When I awoke she was no longer with me. She was nowhere. The rest I do not remember. Those who found me claimed that I was running in circles and crying like a wolf. They had to tie me up. When I calmed down people took me in front of the Enlightenment the subordinates of Vattier de Rideaux. They were concerned about Cirilla. Where she was where and whither she had fled the manner in which she had fled from me why I let her escape. And again from the beginning: where she was where she had fled… I cried with anger against an emperor who likes chasing little girls. I cried for a year while sitting in a cell in the Citadel. But then I was pardoned because I was needed. On Thanedd someone was needed who spoke the common language and knew how Ciri looks. The Emperor wanted me to go to Thanedd… and this time I could not fail. I had to bring him Ciri. He paused.
Emhyr gave me a chance. I could not refuse it. That would have meant absolute total lifelong disgrace and exile. I could not refuse even had I wanted to. And I did not want to refuse. Because you know Geralt… I could not forget her.
Im not going to lie. Ive seen her constantly in dreams. Rather than the skinny child she was on the river when I washed her. I have… I see her still as a woman – beautiful confident provocative… with details such as a fire-red rose tattooed in her groin…
What are you talking about?
I do not know do not know myself… But it was and still is. I see her still in the dreams just as I had seen her in a dream back then… So I agreed to take the mission on Thanedd. Thats why I wanted to join you later. I… I still want to once again… to see her once again to touch her hair to look into her the eyes… I want to see her. Strike me dead if you want. But Im going to stop pretending. I think… I think I love her. I beg you do not laugh.
I am not laughing.
This is the reason why I ride with you. Do you understand?
Do you want her for yourself or for your Emperor?
Im a realist he whispered. I could never marry her. But as the wife of the Emperor I could at least see her every now and then.
As a realist snorted the witcher you have to see that we must first find her and save her. Assuming that your dreams do not lie and Ciri really is still alive.
I know. And when we find her? What then?
Well see. Well see Cahir.
Lead me not astray. Be honest. Youre not going to allow me to take her.
Geralt did not answer.
Cahir did not repeat the question. Until then he asked coldly can we be friends?
Yes Cahir. I ask again for forgiveness for what happened. I dont know what got into me. Actually I did not seriously suspect you of treason or of double-crossing us.
Im not a traitor. I will never betray you witcher.
They rode through the deep gorge of the Sansretour River now fast and wide which cut between the rocks. They rode to the east towards the border of the principality of Toussaint. The Gorgon the Devils Mountain rose above them. They would have had to cover their heads to look at the summit. But they did not look.
First they smelled the smoke. A little later they saw the fire and rods on which roasted trout were skewered. Then they saw the individual who was sitting alone by the fire.
Not long ago Geralt would have mercilessly ridiculed mocked and held for an idiot anyone who dared to claim that he a witcher would feel great joy at the sight of a vampire.
Oho said Emiel Regis Rohellec Terzieff-Godefroy who had just straightened a rod. Look what the wind just blew in.
Knocker: also called a pukacz coblynau polterduk karkonos rubezahl or skarbnik is a variant of the Kobol however it excels in size and power. P. usually wears immense beards. P. live in tunnels in the earth caves caverns rocky abysses and labyrinths. P. usually dwell in lands that are full of hidden riches such as precious stones ores carbon natural oil or salt. Therefore P. can often be encountered in mines particularly abandoned but also in active ones where they like to show off. P. are conniving pests and are spoilers and nuisances and cause havoc for miners by wrecking machines tapping on rocks to frighten collapsing tunnels stealing mining equipment and tools and even sneaking up behind miners and hitting them on the head.
However it is possible to bribe them so as not to cause mischief above an acceptable level. The best is to lay down in a dark tunnel some bread and butter sheep cheese or a portion of smoked fish. The best of all is a brandy flask because it is sweet and the P. are terribly greedy.
Physiologus
CHAPTER SEVEN
Theyre safe confirmed the vampire spurring his mule Draakul. All three of them – Milva Dandelion and of course Angouleme who in time overtook us in the valley of Sansretour and told us everything without sparing us the picturesque words. I could never understand why you humans have so many curses and insults related to the spheres of eroticism. After all sex is beautiful and is associated with beauty joy and pleasure. How can you use the names of the reproductive organs in such vulgar synonyms…
Stick to the topic Regis Geralt interrupted.
Of course Im sorry. Angouleme warned us of the approaching bandits and we immediately crossed the border into Toussaint. In truth Milva was against it and was eager to turn around and seek you both out. I managed to persuade her. And Dandelion instead of rejoicing in the asylum which the duchy gives showed considerable displeasure… Any idea what our poet is so afraid of in Toussaint?
I dont know but I can guess Geralt said sourly. Because it would not be the first place where our friend the bard visited. Now he has settled down a little because he is keeping decent company but in his youth he was not known for his holiness. I would say that the only people who were safe from him were those women who jumped into the water or who were able to climb to the tops of very tall trees. And often the husbands fiancés fathers and brothers frequently showed him hostility you can be sure. In Toussaint there is undoubtedly a husband which the sight of Dandelion may revive memories… But this is not important. Lets get back to the facts. What about the pursuers? I hope you…
I do not think Regis smiled they would have followed us into Toussaint. The border is full of knights-errant who are extremely bored and looking for any excuse to fight. In addition we joined a group of pilgrims on the border who were on their way to the sacred groves of Myrkvid. A place that inspires fear. Even the pilgrims the sick and the lame who make the far journey to Myrkvid for healing remain in the camps on the outskirts of the forest and do not dare enter its depths. It is said that those who dare enter the sacred groves will be burned in a slow fire inside a wicker hag.
Geralt gasped.
Really…
Of course the vampire interrupted him again. In the Myrkvid Forest dwell Druids. Those who formerly lived in Angra in Caed Dhu then migrated to Loc Monduirn and finally to Myrkvid in Toussaint. We were destined to eventually meet with them. Do you not remember that I said that long ago.
Geralt took a deep breath. Cahir was riding behind him.
Is your friend among these Druids?
The vampire smiled again.
They are not my friend but an acquaintance he explained. Yes she is among them. She has even been promoted. She leads the whole circle.
A hierophant?
A flaminica. That is what a woman is called when she achieves the highest druidic title. Only men are called hierophants.
True I forgot. So Milva and the rest…
They are now under the protection of the Circle and the flaminica as was his custom the vampire answered the question while the question was still being asked. For my part I hastened to come and fetch you. A strange thing happened. The flaminica when I began to present our case would not let me finish. She said that she already knew everything. She said that they had been expecting our visit for some time…
How?
I could not hide my disbelief the vampire stopped the mule stood in the stirrups and looked around.
Looking for someone or something? Cahir asked.
Im not looking Ive found. Dismount.
We should go as quickly as possible…
Dismount. Ill explain everything to you.
They had to speak louder to be understood because of the sound of a waterfall falling from a considerable height on a vertical wall of a rocky cliff. Down below where the waterfall spilled into a large lake the rock opened into the black mouth of a cave.
Yes here is the place Regis confirmed the assumptions of the witcher. I came to meet you because I was ordered to go here. You have to enter that cave. I told you the Druids knew about you knew about Ciri and knew of our mission. And they heard it all through the person living in there. This person if we believe the Druids wants to talk to you.
If we believe the Druids Geralt repeated with emphasis. Ive been here before. I know what lives in the deep caves under Devils Mountain. Different people live there. But the overwhelming majority you cannot talk to unless it is with a sword. What else did your Druid say? What else do I have to believe?
She specifically the vampire looked into Geralts shining eyes made me understand that she does not like individuals that destroy and slay living nature in general and that includes witchers in particular. I explained to her that currently you are a rather titular Witcher. That absolutely does not bother nature as long as the latter is not bothering you. The flaminica you should know is a woman of extraordinary intelligence she realized that you left the witchers path not due to a change in your mind-set but because you were forced by circumstances. I know very well she told me that misfortune has befallen someone close to the witcher. The witcher was forced to abandon the witchers path and hurry to the rescue…
Geralt did not comment but his look was so elegant that the vampire hastened to explain.
She said quote The Witcher not being a sorcerer must prove himself capable of humility and sacrifice. He must enter into the dark depths of the earth. Disarmed. Abandoning all weapons any sharp iron. All evil thoughts. And aggression rage anger or pride. He must enter with humility. And once there in the depths of the earth the humble witcher will find the answers to the questions that torment him. He will find answers to many questions. But if he stays the witcher will never learn anything. Those were her words.
Geralt spat towards the waterfall and the cave.
It seems like an inept game he said. A distraction. Entertainment. Divination sacrifice a mysterious meeting in the basement answers to all questions… Such hackneyed tricks you might encounter only from wandering storytellers. Someone here is mocking me. In the best case. And if this is not a mockery…
I would not call it a mockery under any circumstance Regis said firmly. Under no circumstances Geralt of Rivia.
So what is it? One of the Druids famous oddities?
We will not know said Cahir until you find out. Come on Geralt well go in there together…
No the vampire shook his head. The flaminica was categorical in this regard. The Witcher has to go in there by himself. Without weapons. Give me your sword. Ill take care of it while you are gone.
Ill be damned… Geralt started but Regis interrupted with a quick gesture.
Give me your sword he extended his hand. And if you have any other weapons leave them with me as well. Think about the words of the flaminica. No aggression. Sacrifice. Humility.
Do you know who Ill meet in there? Who… or what is waiting for me in this cave?
No I do not know. All kinds of creatures inhabit the underground passages of the Gorgon.
Ill be damned!
That cannot be ruled out he said gravely. But you have to undertake the risk. There is nothing else you can do.
He was right. As expected the entrance of the cave was strewn with an impressive pile of skulls ribs bones and vertebrae. Yet he could not smell the odor of decay. These remnants of earthly life were apparently centuries old and fulfilled the role of decoration to scare intruders.
Or so he thought.
He entered the darkness bones crackled and snapped under his feet. His eyes quickly adapted to the darkness. He found himself in a huge cave with a rocky dome whose size could not be estimated because the dimensions were lost and disappeared in a forest of stalactites that hung from the ceiling like colorful branches. From the floor grew white and pink stalagmites thick at the base and tapering to a tip. Some of the peaks reached high above the head of the witcher. Some stalagmites joined at the top to stalactites forming columns. The only sound echoing in the stone chamber was the echo of falling water drops.
He walked straight ahead deeper into the cave. He knew he was being watched.
The lack of a sword on his back was strongly felt and clearly unwelcome. As the lack of a tooth that has been recently broken.
He slowed his pace.
What he had taken a second before as a bunch of round boulders at the foot of a stalagmite was now looking at him with great glowing eyes. The compact mass of dusty gray tuffs opened their huge jaws and their conical fangs gleamed.
Barbegazi.
He walked slowly and carefully settling his feet. The Barbegazi were everywhere large medium and small ones lay in his way with no intention of departing. So far they had behaved calmly but he was not sure what would happen if he stepped on one. He could not hold a straight course and had to weave through the forest of stalagmites. Cold water from the ceiling dripped down on him.
The Barbegazi – there were still more – accompanied him at every turn crossing and rolling over the floor. He could hear their panting and gasping. He could feel their pungent sour smell.
He had to stop. Between two columns at a place where there was no other way around a huge Echinops blocked the way bristling with long masses of spikes. Geralt swallowed. Echinops could fire spikes at a distance up to ten feet. The spikes had an unpleasant feature – once driven into the body they shattered and the sharp tip penetrated and travelled deeper and deeper into the body until it eventually reached a sensitive organ.
The stupid Witcher he heard from the darkness. The cowardly Witcher! He is afraid ha ha!
The voice sounded strange and alien but Geralt had heard voices like that more than once. Thus spoke beings who were not used to communicating with the aid of articulate speech they had strange accents and intonation with unnaturally lengthened syllables.
Foolish Witcher! Foolish Witcher!
He declined to say anything. He bit his lip and passed the echinops. The spines of the monster waved like the tentacles of an anemone. But only for a moment the echinopsae froze then went back to looking like a large clump of mash grass.
Two huge Barbegazi crossed his path muttering and growling. From above from the top of the cave came the flutter of membranous wings and the cackling and hissing a sure sign of the presence of vespertyls.
Here comes the murderer! The butcher! The Witcher!
From the darkness came the same voice he had heard previously.
He has come here! He has dared! But the butcher has no sword! How will he kill? With his gaze? Ha ha ha!
Maybe there was a second voice with an even more unnatural articulation we will kill him? Hmmm?
The barbegazi croaked in a loud chorus. One of them as big as a ripe pumpkin walked after Geralt and snapped his teeth together on his heels. The witcher stifled the curse that came to his lips. He continued. The water dripping from the stalactites created a silvery echo.
Something clung to his leg. He refrained from shaking it off violently.
The creature was small a little larger than a Pekingese dog. It also resembled a Pekingese in the face. The rest looked like a monkey. Geralt had no idea what it was. Hed never seen anything like it.
Witcher! articulated the thing which was clearly not a Pekingese tightly clinging to Geralts boot. The Witcher! You son of a bitch!
Go away he growled through clenched teeth. Let go of my boot or Ill kick your ass.
The Barbegazi muttered loudly. Something bellowed in the darkness. Geralt did not know what it was. It sounded like a cow but the witcher would have bet anything that it was no cow.
Witcher son of a bitch.
Let go of my boot he repeated controlling himself with difficulty. I came here in peace unarmed. You are hindering…
He stopped and choked on a wave of stench which made his eyes water and gave him goose bumps.
The being clinging to his leg rolled its eyes and defecated directly onto his boot. The foul stench was accompanied by sounds even more disgusting.
He cursed the situation adequately and pushed the troublesome intruder off of his leg. Far more gently than it deserved. Even so what he feared happened.
He kicked it! something shouted in the dark above the hurricane of snorting from the barbegazi. He kicked it! He has hurt the poor creature!
The closest Barbegazi grabbed onto his feet. He felt their strong hard-as-stone paws on his feet and ankles immobilizing him. He did not defend himself he was resigned. The fur of the largest and most aggressive rubbed up against his offensive boot. They tugged on his clothes and he sat down. Something big crawled from a stalactite and dropped to the ground. He knew what it was. A knocker. He was squat dumpy shaggy with bowed legs and broad shoulders with a huge red beard.
As the knocker approached the ground trembled as if it was not one knocker approaching but a Clydesdale. His feet were large almost comically so.
The knocker bent over him and emanated the stench of vodka. That bastard is distilling his own moonshine here Geralt thought mechanically.
You kicked a defenseless little creature witcher the knocker breathed alcoholic vapors into his face. Without any reason you attacked a little defenseless innocent creature. We knew we could not trust you. You are aggressive. You posses the instincts of a murderer. How many of us have you killed you bastard?
There seemed no appropriate answer.
Ooh! the knocker further choked him with the stench of alcohol. Ive dreamed of this since childhood! Since childhood! Finally my dreams are being fulfilled. Look to the left.
He looked like a fool. He received a fist right on the jaw and saw an explosion of brightness.
Ooh! the knocker showed his large curved teeth from inside his thick smelly beard. Ive dreamed of this since childhood! Look to the right.
Enough from somewhere in the depths of the cave came a loud and sonorous command. Enough of these games and practical jokes. Please let him go.
Geralt spat out blood from his cut lip. He washed his boot in a steam of water running down the wall. The dog-faced Pekingese smiled sarcastically but from a safe distance. The knocker also smiled as he massaged his fist.
Go witcher he barked. Go to the one calling you. Ill wait. You will still have to come back this way.
The cave into which he entered was surprisingly full of light. Through holes in the roof brightness penetrated into the cave – it fell onto sedimentary formations and caused a spectacle of color and glitter. In addition to this in the air hung a magic ball of fiery light which was reflected by the quartz on the walls. Despite all the light the edges of the cavern were cloaked in darkness with columns of stalagmites disappearing into the blackness.
On one wall which nature had prepared for that purpose was someone creating a huge painting. The painter was a tall elf with blond hair wearing a paint-stained robe. The magical light seemed to reflect off of him creating a halo around his head.
Sit said the elf pointing to a boulder not taking his eyes from the painting. Did they hurt you?
No. Not really.
Youll have to forgive them.
Indeed. I have to.
They are like children. They were terribly glad of your coming.
Ive seen.
The elf looked at him.
Sit down he repeated. In a moment I will be at your disposal. Im finishing.
What the elf was finishing was a stylized animal probably a buffalo. At present only the outline was complete from the imposing horns to the no less wonderful tail. Geralt sat on the boulder mentioned and promised himself to remain patient and humble – to the limits of the possible.
The elf whistling softly through his teeth dipped a brush into a container of paint and painted with rapid movements a purple buffalo. After a moment of reflection he painted tiger stripes on the side of the animal.
Geralt looked at him in silence.
Finally the elf took a step back in order to access from a distance the finished work – a hunting scene. The striped purple buffalo was being chased by carelessly-sketched figures of people with bows and spears.
What is that supposed to be? Geralt could not resist.
The elf looked at him briefly putting the clean end of the brush to his lips.
It is he said a prehistoric painting done by primitive people who lived in a cave thousands of years ago and worked mainly as hunters of the long-extinct purple buffalo. Some of the prehistoric hunters were artists and felt a deep need to respond artistically. To perpetuate what was in their souls.
Fascinating.
Of course admitted the elf. Your scientists wander for years through caves looking for traces of prehistoric man. And whenever they find them they are fascinated beyond measure. Since it provides evidence that you are not strangers in this land and in this world. Proof that your ancestors lived here for centuries so that the world belongs to your heirs. Well every race is entitled to some roots. Including yours humans whose roots should be sorted in large trees. Ha a funny pun is it not? Worthy of an epigram. Do you like poetry? What else can you think to paint here?
Draw a picture of prehistoric hunters with enormous erected penises.
Thats a good idea the elf dipped the brush into the paint. Phallic worship was typical of early civilizations. It can also be used to forge the theory that the human race suffers from physical degeneration. The ancestors had phalluses the size of batons and the descendants had no more than ridiculous twigs… Thank you witcher.
Youre welcome. I have one more suggestion – the paint looks too fresh to be prehistoric.
Do not worry after three or four days the colors will fade due to the influence of the salt and moisture that runs down the wall and the image will become so prehistoric that your scientists will be mad with joy once they find it. I bet my shoes that not even the brightest of them will recognize my trick.
Theyll recognize it.
How?
Because you wont be able to stop yourself from signing your masterpiece.
The elf laughed dryly.
Exactly. Youve guessed me correctly. Oh my flames of vanity how hard it is for the artist in me to quench my soul. I already signed the painting. Behold here.
Isnt that a dragonfly?
No it is an ideogram indication my name. My name is Creavan Espane aep Caomhan Macha. For convenience I use the alias Avallach. You can address me so.
As you please.
And you are Geralt of Rivia. Youre a witcher. However you do not currently chase monsters and beasts you are looking for missing girls.
The news spreads amazingly fast. And surprisingly far. And surprisingly deep. Apparently you had predicted I would show up here. So Im guessing that you can predict the future?
Predicting the future Avallach wiped his hands on a rag anyone can do. And everybody does because it is easy. The hard part is predicting it accurately.
An elegant argument and worthy of an epigram. You clearly can predict it accurately.
All too often my dear Geralt I know many things and I do many things. Evidence of this is suggested by my – how you would say people. My official title is Aen Saevherne.
Knowing One.
Exactly.
And you would be willing to share your knowledge?
Avallach paused.
Share? he at last drawled. With you? My dear witcher something like that is a great privilege and privileges are only shared with equals. And why would I an elf a Knowing One a member of the elite why would I share anything with the descendant of a being who barely a few million years ago evolved from a monkey rat jackal or other mammal? A being who needed around two million years to discover that using their two hairy hands they can make a primitive tool out of a bone? And after which he got that cone and put it in his anus groaning with happiness?
The elf was silent; he turned and stared at his painting.
Why he said mockingly do you dare hope that I will share with you any knowledge human? Tell me.
Geralt wiped the remnants of shit from his boot.
I guess because he said its inevitable.
The elf turned abruptly.
What he asked through clenched teeth is inevitable?
The fact that it will only take another few years Geralt did not raise his voice and people will simply take all the knowledge regardless of whether anyone wanted to share it with them or not. That includes the knowledge that you an elf and a Knowing One cunningly hiding behind your rock frescoes. Hoping that people will not want to smash your wall with pickaxes and destroy your painting with false evidence of their ancient history. What do you say my flame of vanity?
The elf snorted. Surprisingly quite amused.
Oh yes he said. Vanity is indeed linked to stupidity if I believed that you would stop before destroying everything. You destroy everything you encounter. But why human?
I do not know. You tell me. And if you do not find it appropriate then Ill go. But Id prefer another way out because your companions are waiting with the desire to break my ribs.
All right the elf reached out with a rapid motion of his outstretched hand and the rock wall flung open with a creak and a crack appeared running down the center of the violet buffalo. Go this way. Walk towards the light. Figuratively or literally it is usually the right way.
Its a pity said Geralt about your picture.
Are you kidding? the elf asked in disbelief but surprisingly kind and friendly. Nothing will happen to the picture. With an identical spell I will close the rock and there will be no traces of a crack. Come on. Ill go with you I will guide you. Ive concluded that I do have something to tell you. And to show you.
On the other side of the wall was darkness. The witcher immediately knew that the cavern was immense – from the temperature and air movement. They walked on wet pebbles.
Avallach conjured a light – the Elvish way with only a gesture and without uttering a spell. The glowing ball flew towards the ceiling the crystal formations in the walls of the cave were lit with a myriad of reflections and shadows danced. The witcher sighed involuntary.
This was not the first time that he had seen Elvish sculptures and relief but every time the feeling was the same. The figures of elves frozen in full motion in a blink of an eye was not the product of chisel and sculptor but a powerful wizards spell that could transform living tissue into white marble from the Amell Mountains.
The closest sculpture featured a young elf sitting crossed-legged on a basaltic plate. The elf was straining her neck and had her head turned as if she heard footsteps. She was completely naked. The milk-gloss of the polished marble gave the feeling that her beautiful body was warm and radiated heat.
Avallach stopped and leaned on one of the columns that defined the path between the sculptures.
For the second time he said quietly you have found me out Geralt. You were right the buffalo is painted on the wall as camouflage which is there to prevent people digging through the rock and protecting all that is hidden behind it. It was supposed to prevent the devastation and theft. All races the elves too are entitled to their roots. What you see here are our roots. Tread carefully please. This is actually a cemetery.
The light dancing from the mountain crystals revealed more and more details – statues reliefs monuments columns and arcades. Everything in white marble.
I want it to survive Avallach made a broad gesture. Even when we leave and the entire land is covered by a mile-high layer of ice and snow Tir na Bea Arainne will endure. We will leave here but someday we will return here. We the elves. It is promised in the Aen Ithlinnespeath in Ithlinne Aegli aep Aeveniens prophecy.
You really believe in her? In her prophecy? Does your fatalism run so deep?
Everything was foretold the elf did not look at him but at a marble column covered in a delicate gossamer relief. Your arrival war the shedding of human and elven blood. The rise of your race the decline of ours. The struggle between the rulers of the North and the South. The Ruler of the South will rise against the kings of the North and his troops will fill their countries like a flood and the nations will be destroyed. So begins the destruction of the world. Do you remember the Aen Ithlinnespeath witcher? Whoever is far away will die from the plague – whoever is near will die by the sword whoever forbids will die of hunger whoever survives will be lost in the cold… Because Tedd Deireadh comes – The End of Time The Time of the Sword and Axe The Time of Contempt The Time of White Chill and the White Light The Time of the Wolfs Blizzard…
Poetry.
Would you prefer to hear it less poetic? As a result of the changes to the angle of the sun the earth will shift the boundaries of eternal ice far to the south. Even these mountains will be overwhelmed by a continental glacier. Everything will be covered in snow. And winter will reign.
Well wear warm pants Geralt said without emotion fur coats and hats over our ears.
You took the words right out of my mouth said the elf. And those in these pants and hats will survive and would one day return here to dig holes and rummage in the cave to plunder and steal. The prophecy of Ithlinne does not mention it but I know it. You cannot exterminate cockroaches and humans will always have at least one prolific pair. As for us the elves the prophecy speaks clearly those who follow the Swallow will survive. The Swallow is a symbol of spring it is the savior the one that opens the forbidden door to show us the way to our salvation. It will allow the rebirth of the world. The Swallow the Child of the Elder Blood.
That means Ciri Geralt could not resist. Or her child? How? And why?
It seemed that Avallach had not heard.
The Swallow of the Elder Blood he repeated thoughtfully. From her blood. Behold.
Even among the perfect lifelike statues there was a distinguished monument to which Avallach now gestured. A white marble elf half-lying on a platform giving the impression of having just awakened and was ready to get up at any moment. The face was turned to the empty seat beside her and an outstretched hand touched something invisible there. In her face showed an expression of peace and happiness.
It was a long time before Avallach broke the silence.
This is Lara aep Shiadhal. Obviously it is not her tomb but a cenotaph. Does the position of the statue surprise you? Finally the project to carve in marble the two legendary lovers did not get much support. Lara and Cregennan of Lod. Cregennan was a human and it would have been a desecration to waste Amell marble on a statue of him. It would be a blasphemy to place here a statue of a human being in Tir ne Bea Arainne. On the other hand it would be a greater crime to destroy the memory of that feeling. So they took the middle course. Cregennan… is not formally here. And yet he is. In the look and the gesture of Lara. The lovers are together. Even death cannot separate them. Neither death nor oblivion… or hatred.
It seemed to the witcher that the elfs indifferent voice had changed for a moment. But it was unlikely that this was possible. Avallach approached the statue with care and with a delicate movement stroked the marble arm. Then he turned and his triangular face showed its trademark mocking smile.
Do you know witcher what the biggest drawback of longevity is?
No.
Sex.
What?
You heard right – sex. After less than one hundred years it eventually becomes boring. There is nothing in it that excites or fascinates which would have the beauty of novelty. Everything has been done… one way or another. And then suddenly comes the Conjunction of the Spheres and the appearance of humans. The remnants of humanity fleeing from another world your own world that you totally destroyed with your own hands that were still covered in hair just five million years after you formed as a species. You were only a handful but your average life span is ridiculously short so your continued existence depends on the speed in which you can multiply so the desire the lust for it will never abandon you sex rules you completely it is a stronger pull than even your survival instinct. Dying? Why not provided that before you do you fuck. That in short is your entire philosophy.
Geralt did not interrupt or say anything but he really wanted to do so.
And then what happens? continued Avallach. The elves bored with their boring elven women start to prefer willing human women and the bored female elf indulges in the perverse curiosity of the human male who is always full of vigor and strength. And then something happened that no one expected and no one could explain – elves normally only ovulate once every ten to twenty years but from mating with humans they began to ovulate with every intense orgasm. It worked with some kind of hidden hormone or combination of hormones. The elves understood that with this practice they could have children with humans. And we could work towards exterminating you while we were still stronger. Later you became stronger and you began to exterminate us. But you still had allies among the elves. They were the party of convenience cooperation and coexistence… and they did not want to recognize the reality that they we lying in bed with you.
And what does all this have to do with me? growled Geralt.
You? Absolutely nothing. But it has a lot to do with Ciri. Ciri is a descendant of Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal and Lara Dorren favored coexistence with humans. Mainly one human. With the human wizard Cregennan of Lod. Lara Dorren coexisted with the aforementioned Cregennan frequently and successfully. Simply put – she became pregnant.
The witcher remained silent this time.
The problem lay in that Lara Dorren was no ordinary elf. She had an extraordinary genetic makeup the result of generations of effort. With the combination with other genes of course elven she should have given birth to a unique child. Conceiving with the seed of a human buried that chance; she threw away the result of hundreds of years of planning and preparation. Well at least we thought so. No one suspected that a mongrel born of Cregennan could inherit something positive from their mother. No a marriage so unequal could not bring anything good…
And so interrupted Geralt were severely punished.
Not the way you think Avallach said quickly. Although the relationship between Lara Dorren and Cregennan brought incalculable damage to the elves it was humans not elves who murdered Cregennan. It was humans not elves that led to the downfall of Lara. So it was although many elves had reason to hate the lovers. They also had personal reasons.
For the second time Geralt was surprised by the slight change in the tone of voice of the elf.
Anyways continued Avallach the dream of coexistence burst like a soap bubble and between the races was sparked a bloody war a war that continues to this day. Meanwhile the genetic material of Lara… as you probably already guessed over the years did not die but rather evolved. Unfortunately it has mutated. Yes yes. Your Ciri is a mutant.
This time the elf did not wait for him to say something.
Of course the sorcerers poked their noses in. Deliberately combining selected people in pairs but eventually it got out of their control. Few could guess how the genetic material could be reborn so powerfully in Ciri and what was the trigger. I think Vilgefortz knows the same man who broke your bones at Thanedd. The sorcerers who were experimenting with the descendants of Lara and Riannon did not get their desired results and abandoned the experiment. But the experiment continued only now spontaneously. Ciri Pavettas daughter granddaughter of Calanthe and descendant of Riannon a direct descendant of Lara Dorren. Vilgefortz probably learned this by chance. Emhyr var Emreis Emperor of Nilfgaard is aware of this too.
And you know this too.
I actually know more than both of them. But this does not matter. The mill of predestination works grinding the grain of fate… you cannot change what is to happen.
And what is that?
What was prophesied. What was decided ages ago of course figuratively. Finally something that was determined by the action of an infallible mechanism at whose base lies the Objective the Plan and the Outcome.
This is either poetry or metaphysics. Or both because sometimes it is difficult to distinguish. Is it possible that you can talk in specifics? Even if it is minimal? Well Id gladly discuss this with you further but it turns out that Im in a hurry.
Avallach measured him with a penetrating look.
And why the hurry? Oh sorry… You it seems have not understood anything I said. So I will tell you directly – your great venture of rescue is meaningless. It is useless. First it is too late – the principal evil has already taken place you are no longer able to rescue the girl before he gets her. Second now she has entered the true path The Swallow can fend for herself brilliantly she has the power within herself to make everything fear her. So your help is unnecessary. And third… Hmmm…
Im listening Avallach. Ive been listening the entire time.
Third… Third someone else will help her now. I hope you are not so arrogant to think that this girl is only associated with your destiny.
Is that all?
Yes.
Goodbye then.
Wait a minute.
I told you. Im in a hurry.
Try to imagine for a moment said the elf that I really know what will happen that I see the future. If I tell you what will happen regardless of your efforts. Of your initiatives. If I tell you could you find a quiet place on the earth and sit there doing nothing waiting for the fulfilment of the inevitable consequences from the chain of circumstances would you choose to do that?
No.
What if I told you that your actions could although the likelihood is slim really make a difference but only for the worse? Would you change your mind? Ah I see from your face that you would not. So I ask you – why not?
Do you really want to know?
Really.
Because I simply do not believe in your metaphysical platitudes about objectives plans and from-above counsel creators. I also do not believe in your famous prophetess Ithlinne or her prophecies. I consider her an imagination – the same bullshit and humbug as your paintings. A purple buffalo Avallach. Nothing more. I do not know if you cannot or do not want to help. However I do not hold grudges…
You say that I cannot or do not want to help. How could I help you?
Geralt thought for a moment absolutely aware that the proper formulation of the questions mattered a lot.
Do I save Ciri?
The answer came immediately.
You will save her. Only to immediately lose her. And this time it is forever. Before that happens you will lose all of those who accompany you. One of your companions you will lose in the next few weeks maybe even days. Perhaps even hours.
Thank you.
Im not finished. As a direct and imminent result of your interference with the grinding millstone the Objective and the Plan will be the death of tens of thousands of people. Which however will not matter much because shortly after tens of millions of people will die. The world as you know it will disappear cease to exist and after a period of time will be reborn in a completely changed form. But this will happen and no one will have any effect no one will be able to prevent or reverse the order of things. Neither you nor I nor the sorcerers nor the Knowing. Not even Ciri. What do you say?
Purple buffalo. Nevertheless thank you Avallach
In a way the elf shrugged I am interested to see what a small stone can do if it falls between the millstone… Is there anything else I can do for you?
I think not. Because I guess you cant show me where Ciri is right?
Who said that?
Geralt held his breath. Avallach walked briskly to the cave wall and motioned the witcher to follow him.
The walls of Tir na Bea Arainne he said pointing to the glowing crystal have unusual properties. And I have with all due modesty extraordinary abilities. Place your hand here. Concentrate. Think hard. About how much she needs you right now. Think about how you want to save her. The image should appear to you. And be clear. Look but refrain from violent reactions. Do not say anything. This is a vision and you cannot communicate.
He obeyed.
Despite the elfs claim the vision was not clear. The images were vague but intense and violent and he was taken aback. Severed hands on a table… A window membrane erupting with blood… Skeletons riding skeletal horses… Yennefer bound in chains… A tower. A Black Tower. And behind it… The Northern Lights?
Suddenly without warning the picture became clear and sharp. Too sharp.
Dandelion shouted Geralt. Milva! Angouleme!
What? Avallach became interested. Ah yes. It seems to me that youve destroyed everything.
Geralt jumped back from the wall of the cave nearly falling on the basalt floor.
It doesnt matter dammit! he said. Listen Avallach I have to quickly get to the Druid forest.
Caed Myrkvid?
Yes! My friends are in mortal danger there! They are fighting for their lives! They are threatened by other people! As quickly as possible… the devil! Im going back for my horse and sword…
No horse interrupted the elf calmly will be able to take you to Myrkvid Grove before nightfall…
But I…
Im not finished. Go after your famous sword while I handle your horse. A perfect mount for the mountain paths. This horse is a little I would say atypical… But thanks to him you will be in Caed Myrkvid within half an hour.
The knocker smelled like a horse and there any resemblance ended. Geralt had once seen in Mahakam a contest organized by the dwarves where they rode wild sheep down a mountain and it had seemed to him to be an absolutely extreme sport. But now sitting on the back of the knocker that ran like a madman he knew what a truly extreme sport was.
To avoid falling off he convulsively dug his fingers into the rough mattered hair and squeezed his thighs into the hairy sides of the monster. The knocker reeked of sweat urine and vodka. It ran as if possessed the earth shook under the blows from his huge feet as if he had soles of bronze. Barely reducing his speed he slid down a slope and ran so fast that the air howled through their ears. Flying over ridges some paths and ledges seemed so narrow that Geralt clenched shut his eyelids and did not look down. He crossed waterfalls cascades pits and cracks which mountain goats would not dare to jump and each jump was accompanied by a deafening roar. That is even more wild and deafening than usual since the knocker raged almost without pause.
Slow down a little! the wind pushed the witchers words back down his throat.
Why?
Because youve been drinking!
UUuuuuaaaahaaaaah!
He jumped. The wind whistled in their ears.
The knocker stunk.
The pounding of huge feet on the rocks decreased and rocks and scree rattled less. The ground became less rocky something green swiftly passed by that could have been a dwarf pine. It was replaced by a green and brown fir forest. The smell of resin mingled with the stench of the monster.
Uaaaahaaaaa!
The green needles were left behind. Now they were surrounded by different colors – yellow ochre orange and red. Under the knockers feet leaves rustled.
Slow down!
Uaaaahaaa!
The knocker went through a long jump of a fallen tree. Geralt almost bit off his tongue.
The wild ride ended as abruptly as it had begun.
The knocker dug his heels into the ground roared and slammed the witcher into the ground. Geralt while lying on the fallen leaves gasping for breath could not even curse. Then he got up hissing and massaging his knee which was in pain again.
You didnt fall off said the knocker his voice filled with amazement. Well well
Geralt said nothing.
Here we are the knocker pointed with his hairy foot. This is Caed Myrkvid.
Below them lay a valley filled with fog. Above the fog stood the tips of trees.
This fog the knocker anticipated his question isnt natural. Apart from that you can smell the smoke from here. If I was you Id hurry. Eeech I would go with you… I feel the desire for a proper fight. That would be a fine parade running to the attack with a witcher on my back! But Avallach forbade me to show myself. For the safety of our entire community…
I know.
Do not resent me because I hit you in the jaw.
I dont.
Youre a real man.
Thank you. Also for those words.
The knocker showed his teeth from under his red beard and exhaled the smell of vodka.
The pleasure has been mine.
The fog that flooded the forest of Myrkvid was dense and had an irregular shape reminiscent of a pile of whipped cream planted on a cake by an insane cook. The fog reminded the witcher of Brokilon. The forest of the Dryads was often covered by a magical mist for protection and camouflage. And similar to Brokilon was the solemn atmosphere of the threatening forest there on the edges which mostly consisted of alder and beech.
And in the same way as in Brokilon on the edge of the forest on a path covered with leaves Geralt almost tripped over a bunch of corpses.
The horribly mangled bodies were not Druids or Nilfgaardians and they certainly didnt belong to Nightingale or Schirru. Before Geralt entered the fog he recalled that Regis had spoken of some pilgrims. It seems for the pilgrims the journey had not ended well for some of them.
The smell of acrid smoke and burning in the humid air was getting stronger so he was heading in the right direction. He soon heard voices screams and the creaking of a violin.
Geralt quickened his pace.
On the path flooded by the rain was a cart. Lying next to its wheels were more dead bodies.
One of the bandits rummaging in the cart was throwing items and tools onto the path. The second held the horses; a third was tearing from a dead pilgrim a fox-trimmed cape and a forth was sawing at a fiddle with a bow which he must have found among the loot. For nothing in the world seemed able to make him produce a clear note.
The cacophony came in handy. Hiding the sound of Geralts footsteps.
The music stopped abruptly the strings of the violin gave a wrenching moan the bandit fell onto the leaves watering them with blood. The one who held the horses even managed to scream before Sihil cut his jugular. The third thief did not manage to jump out of the cart but fell roaring with a slit femoral artery. The last even had time to draw his sword from its sheath. But not enough to lift it.
Geralt used his thumb to wipe the blood off of his sword.
Well boys he said towards the forest in the direction of the smoke. That was a stupid idea. You should have listened to Nightingale and Schirru. You should have stayed at home.
Soon he ran into another cart and more dead. Among the many pilgrims lay slashed and chopped Druids in white robes. Smoke from the nearby fire now lay close to the ground.
This time the thieves were more alert. He only managed to get close without being noticed by one who was busy collecting rings and bracelets from the arm of a dead woman. Geralt without thinking slashed at the bandit the bandit screamed and the other bandits intermingled with Nilfgaardians rushed at him with shouts.
He retreated back into the forest using a nearby tree trunk to protect his back. But before the bandits could reach him there came the sound of horses hooves and from the fog emerged a giant horse covered in gold and red barding in a diagonal checkerboard pattern. The horse carried a rider in full armor with a snow-white cloak and a helmet with a visor that stretched to a point. Before the bandits managed to recover the knight was already among them chopping at their necks with his sword left and right and the blood flowed like a fountain. It was a beautiful sight.
Geralt did not have time to stand idly by for two enemies threw themselves at him one bandit had a cheery-colored doublet and the other was dressed in black Nilfgaardian clothing. The bandit he sliced across the face. The Nilfgaardian seeing teeth flying turned on his heels and disappeared into the fog.
Geralt was almost trampled by the horse with the checkered trappings. Which galloped by without a rider.
Without hesitation he sprang through the underbrush toward the place where he could hear shouting cursing and blows.
Three bandits had managed to pull the knight from his saddle and were now trying to beat him. One of them stood astride the knight and beat him with an axe the other was slashing with a sword. The third a man with red hair was jumping around like a rabbit and waited for an opportunity to be able to stick his triangular spear tip in between the armor plates. The fallen knight shouted something unintelligible from inside his helmet and reflected the blows with a shield which he held in both hands. After each blow from the axe the shield was getting lower almost pressing against his chest. It was clear that one or two more blows and the guts of the knight would flow through the cracks in the armor.
In three leaps Geralt was in the middle of the vortex slashing the neck of the jumping redhead with the spear and opening the belly of the one with the axe. The knight agile despite the armor punched the third bandit in the knee with the edge of his shield and pummeled him when he fell – three times in the face until blood splattered the shield. He knelt and searched among the reeds for his sword like a huge horsefly made of metal. Suddenly he saw Geralt and froze.
In whose hands am I? a voice sounded from the depths of the helmet.
In the hands no one. Those that lie here were my enemies.
Oh… The knight tried to lift the visor but the metal was warped and the hinges were stuck. On my honor! A thousand thanks for your help.
For my help? After all it was you who came to my rescue.
Indeed? When?
He didnt see anything thought Geralt. He did not even notice me through the holes in his helmet.
What is your name? asked the knight.
Geralt. Of Rivia.
Coat of Arms?
This is no time sir knight for heraldry.
On my honor you speak the truth brave knight Geralt.
The knight found his sword and stood. His jagged blade like the horses barding was adorned with the red gold diagonal checkerboard pattern and each square alternately bore the letters A and H.
This is not my ancestral coat of arms boomed the knight in explanation. These are the initials of my lady Duchess Anna Henrietta. I am called the Knight of Chess. I am a knight-errant. I am not allowed to reveal my real name or coat of arms. I have made a vow of chivalry. On my honor thank you once again sir.
Its my pleasure.
One of the fallen bandits moaned and rustled in the leaves. The Knight of Chess approached and stabbed him with a powerful thrust to the ground. The bandit waved his arms and legs like a spider stuck under a pin.
Hurry said the knight. Bandits still roam around here. On my honor it is not time to rest!
True admitted Geralt. Bandits wander through the forest killing pilgrims and Druids. My friends are in danger…
Excuse me a moment.
Another bandit was showing signs of life and the knight pinned him to the ground. He kicked his legs so hard that his boots fell off.
On my honor The Knight of Chess said wiping his sword on the grass these bandits are hard to part with life! Do not be surprised sir Geralt that I give them an end to life. On my honor before I would not. But these bandits recover health so quickly that an honest man can only envy. Since Ive had to measure myself against these rogues three times Ive started to finish them off carefully. So they are gone for good.
I understand.
As I said Im a knight-errant but on my honor I am not vicious in spirit. Ha here is my horse. Come Bucephalus!
The forest became more spacious and clear it began to be dominated by great oaks with spreading but rare crowns. The smoke and stench of the fire already felt close. After a while they saw it.
Reed-roofed huts burned in a small village. Cloth was burning on wagons. Among the wagons lay the dead – many were visible from a distance and wore the white robes of Druids.
Bandits and Nilfgaardians taking cover behind wagons which they pushed before them attacked a large house that stood on stilts. The house was built of solid wood beams and covered with wood shingles arranged in a slope which torches thrown by the bandits harmlessly slid down. The house was under siege and was successfully being defended – in front of Geralt one of the robbers inadvertently leaned out from behind the wagon and fell like a thunderbolt struck with an arrow in the skull.
Your friends said the Knight of Chess must be in that building! On my honor they are in considerable difficulty. Come on to their rescue!
Geralt heard a loud shout and some orders he recognized the bandit – Nightingale with a bandaged face. He saw for a moment the half-elf Schirru covering the black Nilfgaardians from behind.
Suddenly horns blared until leaves began to fall from the oaks. The sound of battle horses hooves drummed armor shone and swords of charging knights flashed. With a roar the bandits ran in different directions.
On my honor! growled the Knight of Chess spurring his horse. They are my comrades! They have overtaken us! To the attack let us also gain glory! Slay kill!
Galloping on Bucephalus the Knight of Chess came upon the scurrying bandits. He killed two of them and the others scattered before him like sparrows before a hawk. Two turned in Geralts direction. The witcher took care of them in a blink of an eye.
A third shot at him with a Gabriel – a miniature crossbow invented and built by Gabriel a craftsman in Verden. He pioneered the slogan Protect yourself from banditry and violence said the advertisement. The law is helpless and powerless. Protect yourself! Do not leave home without a handy Gabriel brand crossbow. Gabriel is your guardian angel Gabriel will protect you and your loved ones from bandits.
The demand had surpassed all expectations and the sale had achieved a true record. Soon all bandits wore a Gabriel when assaulting someone.
Geralt was a witcher and was able to dodge the arrow. However he had forgotten about the pain in his knee. The dodge was delayed by an inch and the blade-shaped tip tore his ear. The pain blinded him but only for a moment. The bandit did not have time to tighten the crossbow and defend himself. Geralt full of rage cut off his hands and then spilled his guts with Sihil.
He had no time to even wipe the blood from his ear and neck when he was attacked by a small bandit with eyes like a weasel eyes that shone unnaturally armed with a curved Zerrikanian sabre which he spun with skill worthy of admiration. Geralt had already stopped two slashes and from the two blades poured sparks.
Weasel was quick and observant. When he saw that the witcher was limping he began to circle him and attack from the side that was most beneficial. He was incredibly fast the sharp blade of the sabre howled in attack. Geralt avoided the blows with increasing difficulty. Every time he limped his injured leg had to bear his weight.
Weasel crouched then suddenly jumped up made a clever feint followed by lighting slashes and lunges. Geralt was able to repulse him. The agile bandit moved into a position to launch a dangerous low cut when suddenly his eyes shut he sneezed loudly and mucus ran from his nose at the time dropping his guard. The witcher quickly slashed him in the neck the blade going all the way to his spine.
Whatever anyone says he said looking at the expiring bandit drug use is extremely dangerous.
A bandit who was coming at him with a club raised over his head tripped and fell with his nose into the mud an arrow protruding from his groin.
Im coming witcher! Milva cried. Im coming! Hold on!
Geralt turned around but there was no one to fight. Milva shot the last remaining bandit in the area. The rest had fled into the woods chased by the colorful knights. A number of them were being pursued by the Knight of Chess. He disappeared among the trees but they could still hear his belligerent roars.
One of the Nilfgaardians not quite dead rose suddenly and rushed to escape. Milva quickly rose and drew her bow. The arrow whistled hitting the fleeing man between the shoulder blades.
The archer sighed.
We will be hanged she said.
Why do you think that?
This is Nilfgaard. And for the last two months we have killed mostly Nilfgaardians.
This is Toussaint not Nilfgaard. Geralt felt the side of his head and took his hand away covered in blood. Fuck. What has happened there? Look Milva.
The archer looked at the damage with a critical eye.
Nothing to worry about she said slyly. They just shot off your ear.
Thats easy for you to say. I really like this ear. Give me a bandage blood is flowing down my collar. Where is Dandelion and Angouleme?
In the cabin with the pilgrims… Oh shit.
From the fog emerged three riders on war steeds their coats and banners fluttering in the wind. Geralt was expecting their battle cry. But Milva grabbed him and dragged him under a wagon. There was no joking with someone who rode up armed with a length of spear fourteen feet long giving them an effective range of ten feet in front of their horses head.
Out the horses of the knights kicked the ground around the wagon. Throw down your weapons and come out!
We will be hanged Milva muttered.
She could be right.
Ha scoundrels! thundered the knight with a black bulls head on his silver shield. On my honor you will hang!
On my honor! supported the youthful voice of another with a blue coat. Right here we are going to tear you apart!
Hey! Stop!
Out of the fog came the Knight of Chess. He was finally able to lift the visor on his twisted helmet from underneath it came a now abundant mass of whiskers.
Release them immediately he called. They are not bandits but honest people. She fearlessly defended the pilgrims like a man. And her partner is a good knight I vouch for him.
A good knight? Bulls head lifted the visor on his helmet and looked at Geralt incredulously. On my honor! This cannot be.
On my honor! the Knight of Chess hit his armored fist onto his breastplate. It is true. This valiant knight helped me when I was in trouble when I was outnumbered by those scoundrels who threw me to the ground. He is called Geralt of Rivia.
Coat of Arms?
I must not disclose growled the witcher my real name nor coat of arms. I made a vow of chivalry. Now I am errant Geralt.
Ooo! suddenly shouted a familiar cheeky voice. Look what the cat dragged in! Ha I told you auntie that the witcher would come to our rescue!
And just in time! Dandelion shouted coming up together with Angouleme and a small group of pilgrims a lute in one hand and his trusty pipe in the other. And not a second too soon. You have a sense of drama Geralt. You ought to write works for the theater!
He stopped suddenly. Bulls head leaned forward in his saddle his eyes flashing.
Viscount Julian?
Baron de Peyrac-Peyran?
Two more knights emerged from the oaks. The first with a helmet adorned with a swans white wings led two prisoners tied by a rope. The second knight-errant a practical man had prepared a noose and went to look for good branches.
Neither of them Nightingale Angouleme pointed out to the witcher or Schirru. Its a pity.
A pity admitted Geralt but I will try to fix it. Sir Knight…
But Bulls head – or rather Baron de Peyrac-Peyran was not paying any attention to him. He saw it seemed only Dandelion.
On my honor he drawled. Do my eyes deceive me? This is Viscount Julian himself. Ha! The duchess will be delighted.
Who is this Viscount Julian? asked the witcher intrigued.
I am Dandelion said under his breath. Do not meddle in this Geralt.
On my honor duchess Anarietta will be delighted repeated the baron. We will take all of you to her castle Beauclair. And no excuses Viscount I will hear no excuses!
A few of the deserters have fled Geralt said in a cold tone. I propose we capture them first. Then think about what to do with a day that began so interestingly. What do you say Lord Baron?
On my honor nothing will come of it Bulls head said with regret. Pursuit is impossible. The criminals have fled across the river and we will not plant even the tip of a horses hoof on the other side. That part of the forest Myrkvid is an untouchable sanctuary and in the spirit of the treaties signed with the Druids by our beloved Duchess Anna Henrietta…
The bandits have fled there dammit! Geralt interrupted angrily. They will kill the untouchable sanctuary! And youre telling me that we cannot defend it…
We gave our word of honor! said Baron Peyrac-Peyran as it turned out was more worthy of carrying a rams head instead of a bull. It is not allowed! The treaties! Not a foot on the ground of the Druids!
It is them who are not allowed not permitted snorted Angouleme taking the reins of two of the bandits horses. Leave this empty chatter witcher. Come on. I still have some outstanding accounts with Nightingale and you so I guess would still like to have a chat with a certain half-elf.
Im going with you said Milva. As soon as I find myself a horse.
Me too blurted Dandelion. I too am with you…
Oh no you wont! cried the baron. On my honor Viscount you will ride with us to Beauclair. The duchess would not forgive us if we let you go without bringing you to her. I am not going to stop the rest of you you have complete freedom in your intentions and plans. As companions of Viscount Julian the Duchess Anarietta would receive you with honors at the castle but if you scorn the hospitality…
We do not scorn Geralt interrupted him throwing Angouleme a threatening look who performed behind the Baron different disgusting and offensive gestures. We are not scorning. We will certainly go to the duchess and offer her the tribute she deserves. But first we must take care of what we have to do. We have also given our word. As soon as we finish we will promptly make our way to Beauclair Castle. We will go there without fail.
If only he added significantly and emphatically to ensure that no discredit or dishonor is caused by our friend Dandelion. That is to say Julian.
On my honor! the baron smiled suddenly. No dishonor or discredit will be caused by Viscount Julian I give my word. I forgot to tell you Viscount Count Rajmund died of apoplexy two years ago.
Ha ha! Dandelion shouted his face suddenly radiant. So the count died of apoplexy? What happy and joyful news… That is I meant sad and sorrowful… Let him rest in peace… However if this is so let us go to Beauclair swiftly gentlemen! Geralt Milva Angouleme we will be at the castle!
They forded the river spurring their horses into the woods among the spreading oaks the ferns reached up to their stirrups. Milva effortlessly found the trail of the band of fugitives. They travelled as fast as possible – Geralt feared for the Druids. He feared that the remnants of the bandits feeling safe would take their revenge on the knights of Toussaint by massacring the Druids.
What do you have to say about Dandelion? Angouleme said. When Nightingale had us surrounded in the cabin he told me why he was afraid of Toussaint.
I had imagined said the witcher. I just didnt know he had aimed so high. A duchess ha ha!
It was quite a few years ago. Count Rajmund the one who kicked the bucket apparently swore that he would rip out the heart of the poet cook it and send it to the Duchess and make her eat it. Dandelion was lucky not to have fallen into the clutches of the Count while he was still alive. And we are lucky…
That remains to be seen.
Dandelion says the Duchess Anarietta loves him to madness.
Dandelion always says that.
Close your mouths! Milva barked pulling on her reins and reaching for her bow.
Dodging from oak to oak speeding towards them was a bandit he had no hat no weapons and he ran blindly. He ran tripped over got up and ran again. He screamed. A shriek that was piercing and horrible.
What is it? Angouleme was amazed.
Milva tightened the bow in silence. But did not shoot she waited until the bandit the villain was headed right towards them as if he could not see them. He crossed at full speed between the witchers horse and Angoulemes.
They saw his face white as a sheet and distorted by fear eyes bulging.
What the hell? repeated Angouleme.
Milva shook herself out of her stupor turned in her saddle and launched an arrow into his back. The bandit screamed and fell into the ferns.
The earth shook. From a nearby oak acorns rained.
I wonder said Angouleme what he was fleeing from…
The earth shook again. The bushes snapped and branches broke and creaked.
What is that? Milva wailed standing in the stirrups. What is it witcher?
Geralt stared saw and took a deep breath. Angouleme saw it too. And paled.
Oh shit!
Milvas horse saw it too. It whinnied in panic going on two legs and kicking. The archer flew from the saddle and fell heavily on the ground. The horse ran into the woods. Geralts mount began to gallop back the way they came without prompting which was bad luck as he chose a path under an oak with a low-hanging branch. The branch swept the witcher out of the saddle. The shock and pain in his knee almost deprived him of consciousness.
Angouleme managed to stay on her prancing horse the longest but ultimately she was thrown to the ground. The runaway horse nearly trampled Milva as she tried to rise.
At that moment they saw clearly what approached them and they ceased to be amazed by the panic of the animals.
The creature resembled a tree a gnarled knotted oak. Or maybe it really was an oak. But unlike a typical oak instead of standing there in a field calmly among the fallen leaves and acorns instead of allowing squirrels to race across its branches the oak was walking briskly through the woods trampling strong roots and breaking branches. The stocky trunk or torso of the monster had to be about two fathoms in diameter and the beak protruding from it was perhaps not a beak but rather a mouth because it opened and closed with a sound reminiscent of heavy doors shutting.
Although under the terrible weight the earth trembled so that it was difficult to maintain balance the monster crossed a ravine with breathtaking agility. But did not do this without purpose.
Before their eyes the waving branches and twigs snapped towards a fallen tree and pulled out the bandit hiding there as deftly as a stork when hunting frogs in the grass. Wrapped in the branches the bandit remained suspended screaming until even they pitied him. Geralt saw that the monster already had three other bandits hanging the same way. And one Nilfgaardian.
Run… he groaned trying in vain to stand. He felt that someone was hammering his knee with white hot nails. … Milva Angouleme… Run…
We will not leave you here!
The tree creature must have heard because it happily stamped its roots and hurried towards them. Angouleme when she failed to lift the witcher cursed vulgarly. Milva with shaking hands was trying to put an arrow on the bowstring as if that could somehow help.
Run!
It was too late. The tree creature was already upon them. Paralyzed with fear they could now see his booty – four bandits who were hung on the branches. Two were alive emitting a terrible howling and shaking their legs. The third perhaps unconscious hung helplessly. The creature was obviously trying to capture its prey alive. But with the fourth prisoner this did not work out perhaps he had inadvertently squeezed too tightly as they could see his eyes popping out his tongue protruding from his mouth and blood and vomit staining his beard.
In the next instant they hung in the air surrounded by branches and shouting at the top of their lungs.
Hush hush hush they heard from below from among the roots. Be careful tree.
From behind the tree creature walked a young druid girl dressed in white with a wreath of flowers in her hair.
Do not hurt tree do not squeeze. Gently. Hush hush hush.
We are not bandits Geralt groaned from above barely able to speak as the braches were tight across his chest. Tell it to release us… We are innocent…
Everyone says the same the Druidess chased away a butterfly that hovered near her eyebrow. Hush hush hush.
Ive pissed myself… groaned Angouleme. Damn it all I pissed myself!
Milva just grunted. Her head dropped to her chest. Geralt cursed outrageously. It was all he could do.
The tree creature spurred by the Druidess moved through the forest. During the march all those who were conscious felt their teeth chattering with the footsteps of the tree creature. They soon came to a large clearing. Geralt saw a group of white-dressed Druids here and a second tree creature. This one had a poorer catch – in its branches hung only three bandits which out of them only one was alive.
Criminals murderers unworthy people said one of the druids from below an old man leaning on a long stick. Take a good look. See what punishment awaits those who enter Myrkvid forest as criminals and unworthy. Look and remember it. I let you go so you can tell others what you will see in a moment. As a warning.
In the center of the clearing stood a tall pile of logs and branches. On it supported by stakes stood a large wicker cage which was in the shape of a wooden doll. The cage was full of people screaming and sobbing. The witcher clearly heard the cries of the hoarse frog voice of the bandit Nightingale filled with fear. He could see the pale terrified face of the half-elf Schirru pressed against the wicker lattice.
Druids Geralt shouted with as much strength as he could to be heard above the imprisoned bandits. Lady Flaminica! I am the witcher Geralt!
Who is calling me? said a tall thin woman from below. Steel-gray hair fell to her shoulders and just above her forehead was a sprig of mistletoe.
I am… the witcher Geralt… Friend of Emiel Regis…
Repeat I did not hear.
Geraaaaalt! The vampires friend.
Ah! You should have said so before!
At a signal from the steel-haired Druidess the tree creature lowered them to the ground. Not very gently. They fell down none of them able to stand on their own. Milva was unconscious blood running from her nose. Geralt got up with difficulty and knelt over her.
The steel-haired flaminica stood next to him and cleared her throat. Her face was very thin even emaciated arousing an unpleasant association with a skull covered with skin. Her eyes as blue as cornflowers were kind and sweet.
I think she has a broken rib she said looking down at Milva. But I have a cure. I will give it to her to aid in healing. I regret what has happened. But how was I to know who you were? No one invited you to come to Caed Myrkvid and you were not given permission to enter our sanctuary. Emiel Regis is a testament to you true but the presence in our forest of a witcher a murderer paid to kill living…
Ill leave here without a moments delay honorable flaminica said Geralt. If only…
He stopped when he saw the burning torches being carried by Druids towards the wicker doll full of people.
No! he shouted clenching his fists. Stop!
The cage said the flaminica as if she didnt hear was originally used as winter pasture for the starving animals and used to stand in the forest full of hag. But when we captured these bandits I remembered the nasty rumors and slander that people used to say about us. Well I thought you will have your wicker hag. You invented your nightmare now I will show it to you…
Order them to stop whispered the witcher. Honorable flaminica… Do not burn… One of these bandits has information important to me…
The flaminica laid a hand on his chest. Her eyes were kind and sweet.
Oh no she said dryly. Not at all. I do not believe in the institution of the crown witness. Providing an offender impunity from punishment is immoral.
Stop! cried the witcher. Do not light the fire! Stop…
The flaminica made a brief gesture with her hand and the tree creatures who were still around stomping their roots reached down and put a branch on the witchers shoulder. Geralt sat down heavily.
Set it on fire! the flaminica ordered. Sorry witcher but it is as it should be. We Druids we value and honor life in all its forms. But to leave criminals alive is simple nonsense. Criminals are only afraid of fear. So well give them a lesson in fear. In the hope that we will not have to give a similar lesson ever again.
The brushwood between the crossbar immediately caught flame. The sound from inside the wicker hag made his hair stand on end. Of course it was not possible but Geralt still seemed to hear above the roar and crackle of the fire the sound of the half-elf Schirru screaming.
He was right he thought death is not always the same.
And then after a desperately long time the stack exploded and the wicker hag was caught in a roaring furnace in which nothing could survive.
Your medallion Geralt Angouleme said standing next to him.
What? he coughed because his throat was tight. What did you say?
Your silver wolf medallion. Schirru had it with him. Now youve lost it for good it would have melted in the heat.
It cannot be helped he said after a moment looking into the cornflower eyes of the flaminica. Im not a witcher. I ceased to be a witcher. In Thanedd at the Tower of the Seagull. In Brokilon. At the bridge over the Yaruga. In the cave in the Gorgon. And here in the forest of Myrkvid. No Im not a witcher. So I have to learn to live without a Witchers Medallion.
The king loved his wife the queen without limit and she loved him with all her heart. Something like that could only end in disaster.
Flourens Delannoy
Fairytales and Stories
Delannoy Flourens (1432-1510) – Linguist and historian. Born in Vicovaro secretary and librarian to the imperial court from 1460 to 1475. Tireless researcher into legends and folklore author of numerous important treatises considered to be seminal works of linguistic history and literature from the northern regions of the Empire. Among his most important works one could cite: Myths and Legends of the Nordlings Fairytales and Stories Surprise or Myth of Elder Blood The Witcher Saga as well as The Witcher and the Witcheress or A Search Unending. Beginning in 1476 he officiates as professor at the academy of Castell Graupian where he dies in 1520.
Effenberg and Talbot
Encyclopaedia Maxima Mundi Tome IV
CHAPTER EIGHT
The wind blew from the sea the sails flapped. A tiny drizzle of hail pounded painfully into his face. The water from the Grand Canal was oily agitated by the wind and sprinkled with rain drops.
Please sir this way. The ship is waiting.
Dijkstra sighed he was sick of travelling by sea he was pleased with the few moments when he could feel under his feet the stable embankment and stones and the thought of going back to the rocking deck made him sick. But what was he going to do? Lan Exeter the winter capital of Kovir differed significantly from other capitals in the world. In the port of Lan Exeter travelers who came by sea landed on the stone of the pier only to embark immediately on the next vessel a slender ship with a high bow and a much lower stern driven by a multitude of oars. Lan Exeter was built on water on the broad estuary of the River Tango. Instead of streets the city had canals and all communication from the city was carried out by boats.
He went aboard and was greeted by the Redanian ambassador who was waiting for him. They moved away from the dock the oars hitting the water in unison the ship moved picking up speed. The Redanian ambassador remained silent.
An ambassador Dijkstra thought instinctively. How many years since Redania had sent an ambassador to Kovir? Over one hundred and twenty. And over one hundred and twenty years since Kovir and Poviss shared a border with Redania. It was not always so.
From the beginning of time Redania treated the countries north of the Gulf of Praxeda as their own fiefdom. Poviss and Kovir were as it was stated in the court of Tretogor jewels in the crown. They were ruled there by Counts who called themselves Trojdenians who descended or claimed to be descended from a common ancestor Trojden. Trojden was the brother of the king of Redania Radovid I later known as the Great. Already in his youth Trojden was considered to be slimy and extremely nasty. It was frightening to think what would become of him over the years. King Radovid was not an exception in this regard and hated his brother like the plague. So he named him Count of Kovir to get rid of him sending him as far away as possible. And there was no further place than Kovir.
Count Trojden of Kovir was formally a vassal of Redania but was an atypical vassal that did not carry any burden or feudal obligations. It was not even required of him to take the ceremonial oath of allegiance only a promise to do no harm. Some said that Radovid took pity on him knowing that the Jewel in the Crown could not afford tribute or the vassalage. Meanwhile others claimed that Radovid simply did not want to see the young Count and was dizzy just thinking that his brother could appear in person at Tretogor with money or military aid. What was the truth no one knew but either way it stayed the same. Many years after the death of Radovid I Redania continued to enforce the laws enacted in the days of the great King. First the county of Kovir was a vassal but does not have to pay or serve. Second the allowance that any succession is entirely at the discretion of the House of Trojden. Third Tretogor does not mix in the affairs of the House of Trojden. Fourth Members of the House of Trojden are not invited to Tretogor for the celebrations of national holidays. Fifth or any other occasion.
In short few knew anything about what happened in the North let alone cared about it. In Redania arrived mainly through Kaedwen news of the Count of Kovirs conflicts with minor lords of the North. Alliances and wars with Hengfors Malleore Creyden Talgar and other countries with difficult-to-remember names. Someone had conquered someone else and had absorbed them someone had come close to someone with a dynastic tie someone had defeated someone and demanded tribute. In short nobody knew who whom or why.
However news of wars and struggles in the North attracted crowds of thugs adventures sensation seekers and other restless spirits in search of booty and rich opportunities. These came from all over the world even from as far away as Cintra or Rivia. But mostly they came from Redania and Kaedwen. There were even desertions from the Kaedwen cavalry platoons that had left for Kovir. Rumor even said that at the head of one of these was the famous Aidden the rebellious and illegitimate daughter of the King of Kaedwen. In Redania it was even said that in the court of Ard Carraigh they played with the idea of occupying the northern countries and snatching away the Redanian crown. Some have even started yelling about the need for armed intervention.
However Tretogor announced ostentatiously that they were not interested in the North. As recognized by the royal jurists the law in force was that of reciprocity the principality of Kovir had no obligations to the crown and the crown offered no help to Kovir. Especially since Kovir never asked for any help.
Meanwhile in Kovir and Poviss the wars had left the North stronger and powerful. Though there were few who knew it. The clearest sign of the growing power of the North was its increasing export activity. For decades it was said that the only wealth of Kovir was sand and seawater. The joke ceased to be a joke when with the production of salt factories Kovir practically monopolized the world market for glass and salt.
But while hundreds of people were drinking from vessels with the sign of Kovirs factories and seasoning their soup with salt Poviss still remained in the consciousness of the people a country incredibly distant inaccessible harsh and hostile.
In Redania and Kaedwen instead of someone saying to hell they said to Poviss. If you do not like me says the master of the wayward journeyman there is a clear road to Kovir. Do not use those Kovir manners here! chastised a professor shouting at his unruly students. Go to Poviss cries the son of a farmer who criticizes the ancient plough of his grandfather and the fallow system.
Whoever did not like the ancient order were told there was a clear road to Kovir.
Recipients of these messages slowly began to reflect and soon realized that indeed the way to Kovir and Poviss lacked any obstacles. A second wave of migrants headed north. And as before the wave was made up of strange and unsatisfied people who were different and wanted other things. This time however they were not just adventurers without a homeland and a home.
To the north went scientists who stood behind their theories even if they were all identified as unrealistic and crazy. Engineers and inventors who believed that despite the general view they could construct revolutionary new machinery and equipment. Wizards who considered using magic to construct levees sacrilege. Merchants for whom the prospect of increased profits were able to overcome the rigid boundaries static and short-sighted risks. Farmers and ranchers who were convinced that even the poorest soils could be a fruitful field and you could always raise a type of animal that will thrive in that climate.
To the north also went miners and geologists for the severity of the wild mountains and hills in Kovir meant a sure sign that if the on the surface was so much poverty then the interior must be hidden wealth. For Nature loves balance.
Beneath the surface was indeed wealth.
A quarter of a century passed and Kovir benefited from its mineral resources as much as Redania Aedirn and Kaedwen together. The extraction and processing of iron ore was only surpassed by Mahakam. However even in Mahakam Kovir imported precious metals to produce alloys. In Kovir and Poviss they had a quarter of the global extraction of silver ore nickel lead tin and zinc half of the extraction of copper and native cooper and three-quarters of the extraction of manganese ore chrome titanium and tungsten and the same of metals which only appeared in pure form – platinum ferroaurum and dimeritium.
And more than eighty percent of the worlds gold extraction.
With the gold Kovir and Poviss bought all that was not growing or breeding in the north. And all that Kovir and Poviss did not produce. Not because they could not or did not know how. But it was not profitable. The craftsmen of Kovir and Poviss the sons or grandsons who came there with a bundle on their back now earn four times more than their counterpart in Redania or Temeria.
Kovir traded and wanted to trade with the whole world on an increasing scale. But was unable.
Radovid III was crowned king of Redania. Who after his great grandfather Radovid the Great inherited the name and the cunning and greed. The king by his toadies and flatterers was called the Bold and by all the others the Red realized what no one before him had wanted to realize. Why if there is massive commerce in Kovir is Redania not seeing a penny? Because Kovir is but an insignificant county a fiefdom a small jewel in the crown of Redania. It was high time the vassal Kovir started to serve its sovereign!
Soon came a good opportunity – Redania got into a border conflict with Aedirn; as usual it was over the Pontar valley. Radovid III decided to intervene militarily and began to make the necessary preparations. He enacted a special tax for the war called the Pontar tithe. All the subjects and vassals were to pay this. Everyone. This included Kovir. The redhead rubbed his hands together. Ten percent of Kovirs revenue this was a good thing!
To Pont Vanis which was considered to be a small village with a wooden palisade went the Redanian messengers. After returning to the king they brought shocking news.
Pont Vanis was not a village. It was a huge city the summer capital of the kingdom of Kovir whose ruler King Gedovius sent the king of Redania the following message:
The kingdom of Kovir is nobodys vassal. The pretensions and claims of Tretogor are unfounded and are based on a law that is dead letter which never had any effect. Tretogors kings were never sovereign to Kovir because Kovirs lords which is easy to check the records never paid tribute to Tretogor or fulfilled military obligations nor more importantly were never invited to the celebrations of national holidays. Or any other.
King Gedovius of Kovir passed to the messengers his apologies but he could not recognize King Radovid as his sovereign lord let alone pay a tithe. The same is true for all of the subjects of Kovir as they owed their allegiance to the lordship of Kovir.
In short let Tretogor guard their own nose and not put it into the affairs of Kovir an independent kingdom.
The Redhead broke out in a cold rage. Independent kingdom? Foreign? All right then well deal with Kovir as a hostile foreign kingdom.
Redania Kaedwen and Temeria introduced to Kovir strict retaliatory measures. A Kovir merchant travelling south had to display their goods like it or not in any city in Redania and sell them. Or return home. The same was applied to merchants from the south travelling to Kovir.
For goods that merchants transported by sea without landing in Redanian or Temerian ports Redania demanded custom duties worthy of a pirate. Kovirian boats of course would not pay and only paid when they failed to flee. This game of cat and mouse that began in the sea soon came to an incident. A Redanian patrol boat tried to arrest a Kovir merchant but then appeared two frigates from Kovir the patrol boat was set ablaze. And went down with all hands.
That was the last straw. King Radovid the Red decided to teach his disobedient vassal manners. A Redanian army composed of four thousand men crossed the river Braa and the expeditionary force of Kaedwen moved towards Caingorn.
After one week the two thousand Redanians that had survived the crossing of the Braa in the opposite direction and the miserable remains of the Kaedwen army retreated home through the passes of the Mountains of Milan.
The standing army of Kovir was made up of twenty-five thousand professionals skilled in war-and-robbery mercenaries recruited from the farthest corners of the world unconditionally loyal to the crown of Kovir by their unprecedented generosity and a pension guaranteed by contract. They were willing to face any danger for rewards of generosity never seen for each battle won. These rich soldiers were led into battle by experienced talented and now very rich commanders whom Benda of Kaedwen and Radovid III knew very well. They were officers who until recently had served in their own armies but had unexpectedly asked for retirement and travelled abroad.
Red was no fool he was able to learn from his mistakes. He calmed the agitated generals demanding a crusade; he did not listen to the merchants who demanded an economic blockade to appease Benda of Kaedwen who wanted revenge for the destruction of his elite units. Subsequently he initiated peace talks. Even the humiliation did not deter him a bitter pill that he had to swallow – Kovir agreed to the negotiations but in its own territory Lan Exeter. The mountain had come to the prophet.
They went to Lan Exeter as supplicants thought Dijkstra wrapping his cloak around him. As humiliated beggars. Just as I am today.
The Redanian fleet entered into the Gulf of Praxeda and headed towards the beaches of Kovir. From the deck of the flagship Alata Radovid the Red Benda of Kaedwen and the prelate of Novigrad who joined them in the role of mediator watched with amazement the sea wall rising from the sea and on which stood the squat walls and towers of the fortress that defended the entrance to the town of Pont Vanis. And sailing northward towards the mouth of the Tango the kings saw port after port shipyard after shipyard and wharf after wharf. They saw a forest of masts and an ocean of white sails that hurt the eyes. Kovir as it turned out had a ready remedy for the blockade retaliatory measures and the customs war. Kovir was evidently ready to rule the seas.
The Alata entered the wide mouth of the Tango and dropped anchor in the stone jaws of the outer harbor. But the kings to their astonishment were not expecting another trip by water. The city of Lan Exeter had no streets but canals. Among them was the Grand Canal the main artery and center of the metropolis which led directly from the port to the residence of the monarch. The Kings were transferred to a galley decorated with garlands and scarlet and gold with coat of arms which the Red and Benda to their amazement recognized the eagle of Redania and the unicorn of Kaedwen.
As they sailed down the Grand Canal the kings and their cohorts looked around and remained silent. Actually it would be better to say that they were speechless. They were mistaken in thinking that they knew what was wealth and splendor they were surprised by the manifestations of wealth and the demonstration of luxury.
Sailing along the Grand Canal they passed an imposing edifice of the Admiralty and the office of the Guild of Merchants. They sailed along the promenade filled with a colorful and richly-dressed crowd. They sailed between a row of noble palaces and mansions of merchants that were reflected in the canal water in a rainbow of beautifully-decorated but amazingly narrow facades. In Lan Exeter they paid a tax for the front of the house the wider the front the progressively higher the tax.
The only building with a lavishly wide front was the great winter residence of the monarch of Kovir the Palace of Ensenada. On the stairs leading from the palace to the banks of the canal was waiting a welcoming committee made up of the royal couple – the monarch of Kovir Gedovius and his wife Gemma. Their Majesties welcomed the guests politely respectfully… and unusually. Dear Uncle Gedovius said to Radovid Dear Grandfather Gemma smiled towards Benda. Gedovius was naturally a Trojdenian while Gemma as it happened came from the lineage of the rebellious Aideen who had fled Kaedwen and in whose veins ran the blood of the kings of Ard Carraigh.
The proven relationship improved the mood and aroused sympathy but did not help the negotiations. The Children said what they wanted in a few words the Grandparents listened. And they signed a document that was later called for posterity The First Treaty of Lan Exeter. To distinguish it from those laid down later the First Treaty also bears the name according to the first words of its preamble – Mare Liberum Apertum.
The sea is free and open. Trade is free. The profits are sacred. Love your trade profit and neighbor as your own. Obstructing someones trading and profit is a violation of the laws of nature. And Kovir is nobodys vassal. It is an independent self-governing and neutral kingdom.
It did not seem that Gedovius and Gemma would have made if only out of courtesy a concession even the smallest to save the honor of Radovid and Benda. And yet they did. They agreed that Radovid the Red until such a time as his death in the official documents would retain the title of King of Kovir and Poviss and Benda until such a time as his death would be allowed to use the title of Sovereign of Caingorn and Malleore.
Of course with the caveat of non preiuducando.
Gedovius and Gemma reigned for twenty-five years. The house of Trojden ended with his son Gerard. Then Esteril Thyssen founder of the House of Thyssen ascended the throne of Kovir.
After a short time the kings of Kovir were bound by blood to all the dynasties of the world and strongly adhered to the Treaties of Lan Exeter. They never interfered in the affairs of neighbors. Never tried to claim a foreign heritage although more than once the king or prince of Kovir had every reason to be considered eligible to succeed the throne of Redania or Aedirn or Kaedwen Cidaris or Verden or even Rivia. Mighty Kovir never tried to annex further territory never sent their ships of war equipped with ballista to foreign shores never usurped the title Ruler of the Seas. Kovir was satisfied with the Mare Liberum Apertum the sea is open and free to trade. Kovir professed a religion of trade and profit.
And an absolute and undisturbed neutrality.
Dijkstra adjusted the beaver collar on his coat to protect his neck from the wind and the falling rain. He looked around dragged from his reverie. The water of the Grand Canal looked black. Through the fog appeared the building of the Admiralty the pride of Lan Exeter which looked like a barracks. Even the houses of the merchants had lost their usual splendor and the narrow facades seemed narrower than normal. Or maybe they are damn narrower thought Dijkstra. If King Esterad has raised taxes the greedy owners of the houses could have narrowed the facades.
How long have you had this nasty weather Excellency? he asked only to break the annoying silence.
Since mid-September Count replied the ambassador. Since the full moon. It is going to be an early winter. Talgar has already had its first snowfall.
I thought in Talgar the snow never melted Dijkstra said.
The ambassador looked to make sure it was a joke and not ignorance.
In Talgar he joked too winter begins in September and ends in May. The other seasons are spring and fall. There is also summer… it usually falls on the first Tuesday in August. And it lasts until Wednesday morning…
Dijkstra did not laugh.
But even there the ambassadors face clouded over snow at the end of October is unique.
The ambassador like most of the aristocracy of Redania could not stand Dijkstra. The fact that he was to be subordinate to him was a disgrace and the fact that the Regency Council had appointed Dijkstra to take charge of negotiations with Kovir was a mortal insult. What infuriated him De Ruyter the most famous branch of the family of De Ruyter Baron for nine generations would call this Count spoilt and an upstart. But as an experienced diplomat he beautifully concealed his resentment.
The oars rose and fell rhythmically the ship glided swiftly through the canal. They were just passing beside the Palace of Culture and Art a small but tasteful building.
Are we going to Ensenada?
Yes Count confirmed the ambassador. The foreign minister pointed out that he would like to meet with you immediately after your arrival. So Ill lead you directly to Ensenada. In the afternoon we will send you by boat to the palace as they would like to invite you to dinner…
Excuse me Excellency Dijkstra interrupted him quickly but obligations do not allow me to accept. I have many issues to be resolved and soon; we must solve them at the expense of pleasure. Dinner will need to be another time. In happier more peaceful times.
The ambassador bowed and furtively breathed a sigh of relief.
Dijkstra entered Ensenada of course through the back door. With sincere delight. The main entrance of the monarchs winter residence was located under pediment supported on slender columns and was accessed directly from the Grand Canal through white marble stairs which were impressive but awfully long. The stairs leading to one of the many back doors were much less impressive but also much easier to walk up. Despite this Dijkstra as he walked bit his lip and cursed under his breath so the guards footmen and the butler who escorted him could not hear.
Inside the palace he was expecting more stairs and a further climbing. Dijkstra again cursed softly. The moisture cold and the uncomfortable position in the boat made his foot which had been broken and cured by magic begin to make its presence felt with a dull and unpleasant ache. And bad memories. Dijkstra clenched his teeth. He knew that the Witcher had also suffered broken bones. He hoped the Witcher also ached and wished with all his heart that it ached as long and strong as possible.
Outside it was already dark; the corridors in Ensenada were also dark. However the way that they went following the silent butler was illuminated by a line of lackeys with candles. In front of the wooden doors to which the butler led him were guards with halberds tense and rigid as if they had a reserve halberd up their ass. There were more lackeys with candles the light hurt the eyes. Dijkstra was surprised a little by the pomp with which he was greeted.
He entered the room and stopped immediately astonished. He bowed.
Welcome Dijkstra said Esterad Thyssen King of Kovir Poviss Narok Velhad and Talgar. Do not stand at the door come here closer. Leave the labels outside; this is not an official audience.
Your Majesty.
Esterads wife Queen Zuleyka responded to his bow full of respect with a slight nod never for a moment pausing with her crocheting.
Apart from the royal couple there was not a soul in the room.
Thats right Esterad noticed his gaze well talk in private excuse me just the six eyes. I consider this to be the most sensible solution.
Dijkstra sat in the chair that was opposite Esterad that was offered to him. The king wore across his shoulders an ermine crimson mantle a jacket and a matching velvet hat. Like all men of the House of Thyssen he was tall powerfully built and criminally handsome. He always looked sturdy and healthy like a sailor who had just returned from sea until it seemed that he emanated a scent of cold seawater and salty wind. As with all Thyssens it was difficult to guess the exact age of the king. Looking at his hair his complexion and hands – places that clearly showed age – he could guess that Esterad was forty-five. But Dijkstra knew that the king was fifty-six.
Zuleyka the King leaned towards his wife look at him. If you did not know he was a spy would you believe it?
Queen Zuleyka was small rather plump and sympathetically plain. She was dressed in a manner typical for many women of her type for whom fashion is just an empty concept. She wore a style of baggy clothes in shades of gray. Her hair was hidden under a bonnet which she had apparently inherited from her grandmother. She did not wear any jewelry or use makeup.
The good book teaches us she said in a soft pleasant voice that we should be cautious in judging our neighbors. For we will also be judged. And certainly not for our appearance.
Esterad Thyssen gave his wife a warm look. It was no secret that he loved her immeasurably. Love which for twenty-nine years of marriage had never waned and still clearly burned. Esterad so it was claimed had never betrayed Zuleyka ever. Dijkstra did not think too much on something so unlikely but he had more than three times tried to insert a female agent into the kings favor to gather information. Nothing had ever come of it.
I do not like beating around the bush said the king so I am going to get to the point of why I decided to talk to you personally. There are several reasons. First I know that you do not shy away from bribery. In fact I am sure of my officials but why expose them to such trials and great temptation? What did you intend to offer as a bribe to the minister of foreign affairs?
A thousand Novigradian crowns said the spy unblinking. If he had bargained I would have gone as high as fifteen hundred.
And that is why I like you Esterad said after a moment of silence. Youre a fucking bastard. I remember my own youth. I look and I see myself at your age.
Dijkstra thanked him with a bow. He was only eight years younger than the king. He was sure that Esterad knew exactly that.
Youre a fucking bastard repeated the king frowning. But a bastard who is decent and honest. And that is a rarity in these wretched times.
Dijkstra bowed again.
You see continued Esterad in every country you can find blind fanatics seeking the idea of a social order. They are so committed to that idea that they are willing to do anything. Perhaps even commit the worst crimes because according to them the end justifies the means and justifies their actions. They do not kill they safeguard the order. They do not torture or blackmail they protect the right of state and the struggle for order. The life of an individual if the individual interferes with their dogmas – their established rules – such people are not even worth a shrug. They never become aware that the society they serve consists of precisely these individuals. These people have a so-called broad outlook… Such a view is the surest way not to see other people.
Nicodemus de Boot Dijkstra said.
Almost but not quite the king of Kovir showed his alabaster teeth. Vysogota of Corvo. A lesser-known philosopher and ethicist but also very good. Read him I recommend it. There will still be a book in your country they will not all be burned. But to the point to the point. You Dijkstra also use unscrupulous intrigue bribery blackmail and torture. You do not blink an eye when sentencing someone to death or ordering a covert assassination. The fact that you do everything for the kingdom you serve faithfully does not excuse you nor earn my sympathy. Not at all. Know this.
The spy nodded to indicate that he knew.
But you said Esterad as I said are a bastard character. So I appreciate and respect you which is why I have offered you a private audience. For you Dijkstra having on many occasions being able to make yourself millions you have never in your life done anything for personal gain or stolen a penny from the state treasury. Not even half a farthing. Zuleyka look! He blushed or did I just imagine it?
The queen looked up from her needlework.
When you see the color of modesty you will know the appearance of authenticity she quoted a passage from the Good Book but she could see that on the face of the spy there was not a trace of a blush.
Well said Esterad lets move on to more serious matters. He has crossed the sea directed by patriotic duty. Redania his homeland is in danger. After the tragic death of King Vizimir chaos reigns there. Redania is governed by a band of aristocratic idiots called the Council of Regency. This band my Zuleyka is not going to do anything for Redania. At the moment of danger they will flee or lie down like dogs and lick the pearl-adorned boots of the Nilfgaardian Emperor. Dijkstra is despised by this band because he is a spy murderer and upstart but it is Dijkstra who has crossed the sea to save Redania. Showing who it is that really cares for Redania.
Esterad Thyssen paused to catch his breath and adjusted his hat which had slipped lower onto his forehead.
Well Dijkstra said the king what plagues your kingdom? Except for a lack of money I mean?
Except for a lack of money the spys face was like stone nothing everyone is healthy thank you.
Ah the King nodded and again moved the hat back onto his head. Ah. I understand. I understand and applaud the idea. When you have money you can buy a cure for every ailment. The important thing is to have money. And you do not have it. If you did then you would not be here. Is my reasoning correct?
No objection.
And how much do you need out of curiosity?
Not much. A million.
Not much? said Esterad with an exaggerated gesture grabbing his hat in both hands. This is not much? Ay ay.
For Your Majesty stammered the spy this amount is only a pittance…
A pittance? the King released his hat and raised his hands towards the ceiling. Ay ay! A million is a pittance; did you hear what he said Zuleyka? Did you know Dijkstra that one million and one million are together two million? I understand that you and Philippa Eilhart are frantically rushing to build a defense against Nilfgaard but what do you want? To buy all of Nilfgaard?
Dijkstra did not answer. Zuleyka crocheted with eagerness. Esterad during this time pretended to be admiring the naked nymph painted on the ceiling.
Follow me he suddenly stood up and nodded to the spy. They went to a huge painting showing King Gedovius sitting on a gray horse with a scepter of the military pointing to something not on the canvas probably in the right direction. Esterad dug out of his pocket a tiny gilded wand and touched the picture frame uttering an incantation under his breath. Gedovius and the gray horse disappeared and in their place was a map of the known world. The King touched the wand to the edge of the map and it magically changed scale bringing closer the visible world of the Yaruga Valley and the four kingdoms.
Blue is Nilfgaard he explained. Red is for the kingdoms… or rather what is left of them. What the hell are you looking at? Look here!
Dijkstra looked away from the other paintings mostly of seafaring acts and scenes. He wondered which of them would camouflage Esterads other famous maps that showed the commercial intelligence and military of Kovir the complete network of blackmailed and bribed informants operational contacts saboteurs and paid murderers. He knew there was such a map and had long sought without success how to find it.
The red is your Kingdoms Esterad repeated. It looks bad huh?
Bad Dijkstra admitted to himself. Lately he did nothing but look at strategic maps but now looking at Esterads map the situation seemed even worse. The blue squares were in the shape of a terrible dragons maw ready at any time to catch and tear with their teeth the poor red squares.
Esterad looked around for something that might serve as a pointer to the map and finally pulled out a decorative rapier.
Nilfgaard he started his lesson pointing with his rapier when needed attacked Lyria and Aedirn as a casus belli by declaring an attack on the frontier fort of Glevitzingen. Im not interested to find out who actually attacked Glevitzingen and in what disguise. I also consider it senseless in wondering how many days or hours the armed actions of Emhyr preceded a similar undertaking in Aedirn and Temeria. I will leave that to the historians. I am most interested in the current situation and what will come tomorrow. At this time Nilfgaard is in Dol Angra and Aedirn and protected by a buffer state in the form of the Elvish domain Dol Blathanna which borders on a portion of Aedirn that King Henselt of Kaedwen to talk picturesquely ripped from Emhyrs mouth and ate himself.
Dijkstra did not comment.
I will also leave to the historians the moral assessment of the performance of King Henselt continued Esterad. But a look at the map suffices to show that with the annexation of the Northern Marches Henselt is blocking Emhyrs way into the Pontar Valley. Protecting the flank of Temeria. And yours Redania. You ought to thank him.
Ill thank him muttered Dijkstra. But silently. In Tretogor we are hosting King Demavend of Aedirn. And Demavend has quite an explicit assessment of the moral conduct of Henselt. He is accustomed to expressing it in short but sonorous words.
I can imagine the King of Kovir nodded. Let us leave this for a moment and look to the south to the Yaruga River. In attacking Dol Angra Emhyr secured his flank while signing a separate peace treaty with Foltest of Temeria. But immediately after completing his war efforts in Aedirn the emperor broke the pact and unceremoniously attacked Brugge and Sodden. With his cowardly pact Foltest gained two weeks of peace. More precisely sixteen days. And today is the twenty-sixth of October.
It is.
The situation on October twenty-sixth is as follows: Sodden and Brugge are occupied. The fortresses of Mayena and Razwan have fallen. The Temerian army was defeated at the Battle of Maribor driven back north. Maribor is besieged. This morning they were still holding. But it is evening now Dijkstra.
Maribor will stand. Nilfgaard could not have surrounded them.
That is true. They have penetrated too deeply into foreign territory stretching their supply lines and leaving their flanks dangerously exposed. Before the coming of winter they will be forced to break their siege and withdraw to the Yaruga and shorten their front. But what will happen in the spring Dijkstra? What will happen when the grass comes out from under the snow? Come. Look at the map.
Dijkstra looked.
Look at the map repeated the king. Ill tell you what Emhyr var Emreis will do in the spring.
With spring will begin an offensive on an unprecedented scale Carthia van Canten announced arranging her golden curls before the mirror. Oh I know this information in itself is not revolutionary; in every rural womans gossip circle they are talking about the offensive.
Assire var Anahid was exceptionally angry and impatient that day yet managed to contain and not express the question about why on earth she listened to this banal information. But she knew Cantarella. If Cantarella started talking about something she had good reasons. And her conclusions were usually accurate.
I however know a little more than the village gossip said Cantarella. Vattier told me everything about what was discussed at the meeting with the Emperor. He even brought me a folder with maps and when he fell asleep I looked for myself… Shall I continue?
Certainly Assire narrowed her eyes. Speak my dear.
The direction of the main attack is of course Temeria the Pontar River Novigrad Vizima and Ellander. The Center Army Group under the command of Menno Coehoorn will strike. The flanking armies will be the East Army Group which will strike from Aedirns Pontar valley and Kaedwen…
From Kaedwen? Assire raised her eyebrows. Does this mean the end of a fragile friendship concluded once the spoils are divided?
Kaedwen threatens the right flank Carthia van Canten opened her mouth slightly. Her dolls mouth was a terrible contrast to the strategic wisdom she was speaking. The attack will be preventive in nature. A detachment of the East Army Group will attack King Henselt and head off any possible aid to Temeria.
From the west continued the blonde will attack the Verden Operations Group with the task of controlling Cidaris and blocking Novigrad Gors Velen and Vizima. The General Staff foresees a long siege of the three cities.
You have not mentioned the names of the heads of the two army groups.
The East Group Ardal aep Dahy smiled Cantarella and Verden Joachim de Wett.
Assire blinked in surprise.
Interesting she said. The two nobles offended that their daughters were excluded from Emhyrs marriage plans. Our Emperor is either very naïve or very clever.
If Emhyr knew anything about the nobles conspiracy said Carthia it was not from Vattier. He did not say anything to him.
Go on.
Never before has there been a military operation of this scale. In total counting the frontline units reserves auxiliary services and the rear-guard the operation will be attended by over three hundred thousand people. And elves of course.
The date of commencement?
Not stated. The main problem is the supplies. And the problem with the supplies is the state of the roads. No one can predict when winter will end.
And what else did Vattier speak of?
He complained poor thing Cantarella said flashing her teeth. The Emperor humiliated him again and rebuked him. In front of others. Again the reason was the mysterious disappearance of Stefan Skellen and his entire department. Emhyr publicly called Vattier incompetent and said that he was a head of a service that instead of making people disappear without a trace are surprised with the disappearances. He constructed on this topic a malicious pun which Vattier could not accurately repeat. Then the Emperor jokingly asked Vattier if this means that there is another secret organization in this country concealed even from him. He is cunning our Emperor. He was close.
Close. Assire murmured. What else Carthia?
The agent who Vattier put in Skellens band and who disappeared along with him was named Neratin Ceka. Vattier must value him very much because he was extremely angry about his disappearance.
I too thought Assire am furious by the disappearance of Jediah Mekesser. But I unlike Vattier de Rideaux will soon know what happened.
And Rience? Vattier did not contact him again?
I think not. Vattier did not mention it.
Both were silent a moment. The silence was broken by Assires cat purring loudly.
Lady Assire.
Yes Carthia.
Do I have to play the role of the silly lover for a long time? I would like to go back to school to devote myself to scientific research…
Soon interrupted Assire. A little bit longer. Hold on girl.
Cantarella sighed.
They ended the conversation and said goodbye. Assire var Anahids cat jumped from the chair and she began to read the letter from Fringilla Vigo again who was in Toussaint. She remained lost in thought. This letter was the cause of her restlessness hiding between the lines Assire felt was some significance that she had yet to decipher. It was long after midnight when Assire var Anahid Nilfgaardian witch set up the megascope and established a telecommunication to the castle of Montecalvo in Redania.
Philippa Eilhart was in a short nightgown with thin straps and her face and neck had traces of lipstick. Assire with a great effort of will contained an expression of displeasure. Never ever will I understand this. And I do not want to understand.
Can we speak freely?
Philippas hand made a sweeping gesture. And she surrounded herself with a magic sphere of discretion.
Now yes.
I have information Assire said dryly. By itself it is not revolutionary gossip from rural farmers wives around a well. However…
All of Redania Esterad Thyssen said looking at his map can at this moment enlist thirty-five thousand line soldiers including four thousand heavy cavalry. In round figures of course.
Dijkstra nodded. The figure was quite accurate.
Demavend and Meve had an army like that. Emhyr broke it in twenty-six days. The same will happen to the armies of Redania and Temeria if not quickly reinforced. I approve of your idea Dijkstra yours and Philippa Eilharts. You need soldiers. You need experienced cavalry well trained and well equipped. You need horses more than a million lintars.
The spy nodded confirming that this calculation was beyond reproach.
As you no doubt know however the king continued dryly Kovir always was and always will be neutral. A treaty binds us to the empire of Nilfgaard signed by my grandfather Esteril Thyssen and the Emperor Fergus var Emreis. The letter of the treaty does not allow Kovir to support the enemies of Nilfgaard with military aid. Neither money nor troops.
When Emhyr var Emreis is finished with Redania and Temeria Dijkstra cleared his throat he will look north. Emhyr will not have enough. It may be that your treaty will soon not be worth a damn. Not long ago we talked about Foltest of Temeria whose treaty with Nilfgaard served to not buy him more than sixteen days of peace…
Oh dear Esterad smiled. Such arguments I cannot in good conscience accept. Treaties are like a marriage: you cannot enter into it with the idea of possible treachery there is no place for suspicion. And those who dont like it should not get married. Because you cannot be stags without being married but I admit that the fear of the horns is a rather ridiculous and pathetic excuse for forced celibacy. And the horns of marriage do not touch on the subject of what if… As long as there are no horns it does not touch on that subject and if they do then there is no talk about it. Speaking of horns hows the husband of the beautiful Marie the Marquis de Mercey Minister of Finance for Redania?
Your Majesty Dijkstra bowed stiffly has enviable informants.
Certainly I do acknowledged the King you would be amazed at how many and how honorable. But you also should not be ashamed of your own. Those who you have in my palaces here and in Pont Vanis. Oh my word each of them deserves the highest honor.
Dijkstra did not even blink.
Emhyr var Emreis Esterad continued looking at the nymphs on the ceiling also has some good well-established agents. So I repeat – for reasons of state Kovir neutrality is the principal pacta sunt servanda. Kovir does not violate treaties. Kovir does not violate even to precede the violation of the treaty by the other party.
I dare to notice Dijkstra said that Redania does not urge Kovir to break the treaty. Redania is in no way seeking an alliance or military assistance from Kovir against Nilfgaard. Redania wants to… to borrow a small sum of money that they will return…
I dont see interrupted the king how you are going to return it as we are not going to lend you a penny. And spare me the hypocritical manoeuvers Dijkstra because you are stuck like a bib to a wolf. Do you have any other arguments – serious intelligent or accurate?
Im afraid not.
Youre lucky that you became a spy Esterad Thyssen said after a pause. In trade you would not have made a career.
Since the world began all royal couples have had separate bedrooms. Kings – with very different frequencies – have visited the rooms of the queens and there are instances where the queens have unexpectedly visited the rooms of the kings. Then the couples went off to their own chambers and beds.
The royal couple of Kovir in this regard were an exception. Esterad Thyssen and Zuleyka always slept together in one bedroom in a huge bed with a huge canopy.
Before bed Zuleyka put on glasses something she was ashamed to show in front of her subjects and read the Good Book. Esterad Thyssen usually talked. This night was no different. Esterad put on his nightcap and took his scepter in hand. He liked to hold the scepter and have fun with it but did not do so in public because he feared his subjects would call him pretentious.
You know Zuleyka he confided lately I have had strange dreams. Several times I have dreamed about my mother. Standing over me and repeating I have a wife for Tankred I have a wife for Tankred. And she shows me a nice but very young girl. Do you know who the girl is Zuleyka? Ciri Calanthes granddaughter. Remember Calanthe Zuleyka?
Of course I remember my husband.
Cirilla of Cintra Esterad continued talking playing with the scepter is said to be chosen to marry Emhyr of Nilfgaard. The Emperors intention surprised everyone… How the devil could she become Tankreds wife?
Our Tankred the queens voice was soft as always when talking about her son needs a woman. Perhaps if he settled…
Maybe Esterad sighed. Although I doubt he can. In any case marriage has a chance. Hmmm… This Ciri… Ha! Kovir and Cintra. The mouth of the Yaruga! It sounds good. Not a bad marriage… Not a bad alliance… But if Emhyr has his eye on the little one… Only why did she appear to me in my dreams? Why the devil did I dream this nonsense? At the equinox you remember I woke up then too… Brrr what a nightmare Im glad that I cannot remember the details… Humm… Do I still call on an astrologer? A soothsayer? A medium?
Lady Síle de Tansarville is in Lan Exeter.
No the king frowned. I do not want that witch. Too smart. She is becoming another Philippa Eilhart! These wise women smell of too much power you cannot embolden their privileges or trusts.
As always youre right husband.
Hmmm… But these dreams…
The Good Book Zuleyka turned a few pages says that when humans sleep the gods will open their ears and speak. Meanwhile the Prophet Lebioda teaches that seeing a dream you see either great wisdom or great folly. The important thing is to know how to recognize it.
The marriage of Tankred to Emhyrs promised bride seems like no great wisdom Esterad sighed. And speaking of wisdom I would be very happy if it came to me in a dream. It is the thing for which we have been visited by Dijkstra. It is a difficult issue. Because you know my dearest Zuleyka there is no reason to be happy that Nilfgaard will be coming north to conquer Novigrad any day. From Novigrad everything our neutrality looks different from the far South. It would be good if Redania and Temeria contain the advance of Nilfgaard and turns the assault back to the Yaruga. But would it be right to do so with our money? Are you listening dear?
I hear you husband.
And what do you say?
All wisdom is contained in the Good Book.
And does your Good Book say we would get a visit from Dijkstra asking for a million linters?
The book Zuleyka blinked from behind her glasses does not say anything about unworthy mammon. But in one passage it says that it is more blessed to give than to receive and helping the poor with charity is noble. It says – give to all and it will make your soul noble.
And great dinners fill graves Esterad Thyssen murmured. Zuleyka apart from the passages that deal with the noble soul does the book share some wisdom on business? What does the book say for example about exchange of equivalent?
The queen adjusted her glasses and quickly flicked through the pages.
And they gave to Jacob all the strange goods and Jacob hid them.
Esterad was silent for a long time.
Or perhaps he said at last something else?
Zuleyka returned to searching the Good Book.
I found she soon announced something in the wisdom of the prophet Lebioda. Shall I read it?
Please.
And the prophet Lebioda says Indeed give to the poor in abundance. But instead of giving to the poor all the melon give him only half a melon – to the poor it will seem like luck.
Half a melon snorted Esterad Thyssen. You mean half a million linters? You know Zuleyka that having half a million and not having half a million it all adds up to a million?
You did not let me finish the queen chided her husband with a stern look over her glasses. The Prophet Lebioda continues It is even better to give the poor a quarter of a melon. And the best part is to get someone else to give a melon to the poor. Because I tell you that there is always someone who has a melon and is willing to give to the poor – if not from generosity then for calculations for very different reasons.
Ha! The King of Kovir struck his scepter on the nightstand. Indeed the prophet was a smart guy! Arrange to have someone else give instead of me? I like that those are truly golden words. Search the wisdom of that prophet my dear Zuleyka. Im sure you will still find something that will allow me to fix my problems with Redania and the army Redania wants to organize with my money.
Zuleyka turned the pages in the book for a while until she finally started reading.
One day one of the Prophet Lebiodas disciples came to him and said Advise me Master what shall I do? My neighbor wishes for my favorite dog. If I give him my pet my heart will break with grief. If I do not give it to him then he will be unhappy because my refusal will hurt my neighbor. What should I do? Have you something asked the prophet you love less than your beloved dog? I have Master replied the disciple a stray cat a wicked pet that I have never loved. And the Prophet Lebioda said Take your stray cat and give it to your neighbor. In this case youll find happiness twice. You get rid of the cat and your neighbor will rejoice. Because most of the time the neighbor will not be pleased so much with the gift but knowing that he was gifted.
Esterad was silent for some time his forehead wrinkled.
Zuleyka? he asked at last. Is that the same prophet?
Take the stray cat…
I heard the first time! cried the king but immediately recovered. Forgive me my dear the thing is I do not understand what cats have to do with it…
He fell silent. And fell into deep thought.
After eighty-five years the situation had changed so that people could speak on certain matters without fear and could speak of Guiscard Vermuellen Duke of Creyden grandson of Esterad Thyssen son of his eldest daughter Gaudemunda. Duke Guiscard was already a gray-haired old man but the events he witnessed he remembered well. It was indeed Duke Guiscard who revealed where the one million lintars came from with which the Redanians used to equip it with cavalry for the war with Nilfgaard. The one million did not come as expected from the treasury of Kovir but from the chief of Novigrads coffers. Esterad Thyssen revealed Guiscard got the money from Novigrad for their participation in newly-formed overseas trading companies. The paradox was that those companies had been formed with the active cooperation of Nilfgaardian merchants. The venerable Dukes revelations therefore showed that Nilfgaard – to some extent – had helped pay to organize the Redanian army.
My grandfather recalled Guiscard Vermuellen said something about melons smiling slyly. He said that there will always be ones who want to give to the poor even if only from calculations. He also said that since Nilfgaard itself is helping the strength and fighting capacity of the Redanian army they could have no complaints about others.
Then the old man continued my grandfather called father who was then the head of the intelligence and Interior Minister. When he found out what his orders were he fell into a panic. The order was to release from prison internment camps and exile more than three thousand people. In addition hundreds were to have their house arrest lifted.
No it was not just thieves common criminals and hired mercenaries. The amnesty covered all dissidents. Among those affected by the amnesty were the supporters of the deposed usurper King Rhyd. The Interior Minister was shocked and very worried about his father.
Meanwhile the Duke said grandfather laughed as if it was the best of jokes. And then he said – I remember every word – It is a great shame gentlemen that you do not have such bedtime reading as the Good Book. If you did you would understand the ideas of your monarch. And so you will follow your orders not understanding them. But do not worry unnecessarily; your monarch knows what he does. And now go and release all my stray cats and wicked pests.
Thats what he said – stray cats and pests. And so it was that no one could know they would become future heroes and warlords in glory and fame. These cats of grandfather were the famous condottieri – Adam Adieu Pangratt Lorenzo Molla Juan Frontino Gutierrez… and Julia Abatemarco who became famous in Redania as Pretty Kitty… You young people do not remember but in my day when we played war every kid wanted to be Adieu Pangratt and every girl wanted to be Julia Pretty Kitty… And for grandfather they were the sly cats.
Then Guiscard Vermuellen murmured grandfather took me by the hand and led me to the terrace where grandmother Zuleyka was feeding the seagulls. Grandpa said… said…
The old man slowly and with effort tried to recall the words that eighty-five years ago Esterad Thyssen said to his wife Queen Zuleyka on the terrace of the palace of Ensenada high above the Great Canal.
You know my dearest wife Ive seen another wisdom from the Prophet Lebioda? One that will still give me an advantage over having donated my cats to Redania. Cats my Zuleyka come home. Cats always come home. And when my cats return bringing home their wages their booty their riches… I will tax those cats!
When King Esterad Thyssen spoke one last time with Dijkstra he did so alone without even Zuleyka. On the floor of the giant ballroom was a ten-year-old boy but he did not count because he was too busy playing with his tin soldiers to pay attention to any of the talking.
This is Guiscard Esterad explained pointing to the boy with a nod of his head my grandson son of Gaudemunda and that rascal Duke Vermuellen. But this small child Guiscard is the only hope of Kovir if something was to happen to Tankred Thyssen… If something happened to Tankred…
Dijkstra already knew Kovirs problem and Esterads personal problem. He knew something had already happened to Tankred. If the boy had any talent at all to be a king it was to only be a bad king.
Your business Esterad changed the subject has been essentially settled. You can start reconsidering how to most effectively use the one million lintars which will soon find its way into the Tretogor treasury.
He bent down and picked up one of the garishly-painted tin soldiers – a rider with a raised sword.
Take this and keep it safe. The one who shows you the second identical soldier will be my messenger despite his appearance though you cannot lend credence to any of my men who know the business of our million. All others will be provocateurs and you have to treat them as provocateurs.
Redania Dijkstra bowed will not forget this Your Majesty. I in their name would like to assure you of my personal gratitude.
No gratitude bring in that thousand with which you planned to get the goodwill of my minister. What does the goodwill of a king not deserve a bribe?
Your Royal Majesty it was lowered to…
Lowered I can bet it was lowered. Bring me the money Dijkstra. Having a thousand and a thousand…
Added together is two thousand. I know.
In a distant wing of Ensenada in a room much smaller in size the sorceress Síle de Tansarville listened intently and solemnly to the testimony of Queen Zuleyka.
Perfect she bowed her head. Perfect Your Majesty.
I did everything as you advised me Lady Síle.
Thank you for that. And once again I assure you that we are acting for a just cause. For the sake of the country. And the dynasty.
Queen Zuleyka cleared her throat her voice changed slightly.
And… and Tankred Lady Síle?
I gave my word said Síle de Tansarville in a cold voice. I gave my word that I would return your help with my help. Your Majesty can sleep peacefully.
I very much wish to Zuleyka said. With all my heart. And speaking of dreams… The King begins to suspect something. Those dreams surprise him and when something surprises the king he begins to suspect…
For a time I will stop inspiring the dreams of the king promised the sorceress. Let us return to the sleep of the queen. I repeat it must be peaceful. Prince Tankred will be separated from bad company. He will no longer frequent the castle of Baron Surcratasse. Or to the house of Lady de Lisemore. Or to the Redanian ambassadors.
There will be no more visits to these persons? Ever?
The people mentioned the dark eyes of Síle de Tansarville glowed strangely dare not invite or deceive Prince Tankred anymore. They will never dare. They are aware of the consequences. I guarantee my words. I also guarantee that Prince Tankred will resume learning and be a diligent student a serious and sober young man. He will stop chasing skirts. He will lose the passion… until such a time as we present him to Ciri princess of Cintra.
Oh I just cannot believe it Zuleyka clasped her hands together. I just cant believe it.
The power of magic Síle de Tansarville smiled unexpectedly to herself is sometimes hard to believe Your Majesty. And so indeed it should be.
Philippa Eilhart adjusted the shoulder straps of her translucent nightgown and wiped the crimson lipstick from her neck. Such a wise woman thought Síle de Tansarville with a slight distaste and yet she does not know how to keep her hormones in check.
Can we talk?
Philippa surrounded herself with a sphere of discretion.
We can now.
All is arranged in Kovir. Positively.
Thank you. Has Dijkstra already sailed?
Not yet.
What is he waiting for?
He is having a long conversation with Esterad Thyssen Síle de Tansarville pursed her lips. They have found a common ground with suspicion – King and spy.
You know that joke about the weather here Dijkstra? That Kovir only has two seasons…
Winter and Summer. I know…
Do you know how to recognize that summer has already started in Kovir?
No. How?
The rain gets somewhat warmer.
Ha ha.
Jokes are jokes Esterad said seriously but these winters that are coming faster and getting longer are making me a bit uneasy. This was prophesied. Have you read I think the prophecy of Ithlinne? It says that a decade of endless winter approaches. Some argue that this is some allegory but I harbor certain fears. In Kovir we once had four years of winter; bad weather poor harvests. If it were not for a massive importation of food from Nilfgaard the people would have begun to starve. Can you imagine?
To be honest no.
I do. In the cooling climate we can all starve. Hunger is the enemy with which it can be damn hard to make war.
The spy nodded thoughtfully.
Dijkstra?
Your Royal Highness?
Do you find peace in the countryside?
Not much. But I try.
I know there is much talk about it. From those who betrayed Thanedd only Vilgefortz is alive.
After the death of Yennefer yes. You know Your Majesty that Yennefer was killed? She died on the last day of August under mysterious circumstances in the famous Sedna Abyss between the Islands of Skellige and the Cape of Peixe de Mar.
Yennefer of Vengerberg Esterad said slowly was not a traitor. She was not an ally of Vilgefortz. If you want I can provide you evidence.
I do not want it Dijkstra said after a pause. Or maybe I do want it but not now. She is more convenient to me as a traitor.
I understand. Do not trust wizards Dijkstra. Philippa in particular.
Ive never trusted her. But we have to collaborate. Without her Redania would sink into chaos and disappear.
Youre right. But if I can offer some advice loosen up a little. You know what I mean. Gallows and torture chambers all around the country cruelties against the elves… and that awful fort Drakenborg. I know you do it for patriotism. But you build yourself into a legend of evil. In this legend you are a werewolf after innocent blood.
Someone has to do it.
And there will be someone to blame. I know that you are trying to be fair but mistakes can simply not be avoided. You cant continue to remain clean of all the blood. Youve never hurt anyone out of your own interest. But who is going to believe that? Who is going to believe? One day fate will turn and accuse you of killing innocent people and reaping the benefits. A lie sticks to a man like tar.
I know.
You have a chance to defend yourself. The tar will cover you… later. After the fact. Beware Dijkstra.
Ill beware. They will not get me.
They took your King Vizimir. From what I hear with a dagger in the side to the hilt…
A king is easier to hit than a spy. They cannot reach me. Never catch me.
They must not. You know why Dijkstra? Because in this hell of a world at least there is some justice.
There came a day when both recalled that conversation. Both of them. The King and the spy. Dijkstra remembered the words of Esterad of Kovir when he heard the footsteps of murderers who came for him on all sides throughout the corridors of the castle. Esterad recalled the words of Dijkstra on the ostentatious marble stairs that led from Ensenada to the Grand Canal.
He could have fought Guiscard Vermuellen continued his blind clouded eyes driving deep into the abyss of his memories. It was only three assassins and my grandfather was a strong man. He could have fought and defended until I got the guards. He could have simply run away. But there was grandmother Zuleyka. Grandfather shielded and protected Zuleyka and only Zuleyka and did not care about himself. When at last help came Zuleyka had not a scratch. Esterad had received more than twenty stab wounds. He died after three hours without regaining consciousness.
Have you ever read the Good Book Dijkstra?
No Your Majesty. But I know what is written in there.
Just imagine yesterday I opened it at random. And I came across this passage – On the way to eternity all walk down their stairs carrying their own burden. What do you think of that?
Time is running out King Esterad. Its time to carry our own burden.
Take care spy.
Take care king.
We left the ancient and famous festival in Assengard and travelled sixteen leagues south into the countryside known as Hundredlakes. If one looks on that region from above one sees numerous lakes that form all kinds of artful arrangements and patterns. Our guide the Elf Avallach called for us to look among these patterns for one that resembled a Trifolium leaf. And indeed we found such. Which ended up being not three lakes but four for one was an oblong shape extending from south to north as it was the stem of the leaf. That lake now called Tarn Mira was surrounded by a black forest and at its northern edge should have risen up that mysterious bastion that is called the Tower of Swallows or in the language of elves: Tor Zireael.
On that day however we saw nothing but fog. Before we could even ask the elf Avallach about the tower he commanded us to silence with a gesture and spoke these words: Wait and hope. Hope returns with the light and the prophecy. Be watchful of the boundless waters; there you shall behold the messenger of good tidings.
Buyvid Backhuysen
Walks On Trails And Places Of Magic
This book is nonsense from beginning to end. The ruins at Lake Tarn Mira have been widely studied. They are not magic contrary to the statements of B. Backhuysen and therefore cannot be the remains of the legendary Tower of the Swallow.
Ars Magica Ed. XIV
CHAPTER NINE
Theyre coming! Theyre coming!
Yennefer held her damp wind-ruffled hair firmly with both hands and went to the railing to look down on the stairs leading to the beach brushing women out of her way. The wave driven by the west wind broke thunderously on the shore. White sparkling fountains shot up again and again from the crevices between the rocks. Theyre coming! Theyre coming!
Almost the entire archipelago was visible from the upper terraces of the citadel of Kaer Trolde the main fortress of Ard Skellig. Straight ahead across the sound was An Skellig – low and flat on the south side and covered by steep fjords on the north. To the left far away the sharp tusks and high cliffs of green Spikeroog rose above the waves; the peaks disappearing in the clouds. To the right one could see the steep cliffs of the island Undvik on which swarmed gulls petrels cormorants and gannets. Behind Undvik peeped the wooded cone of Hindarsfjall the smallest island of the archipelago. And if one climbed up to the top of the towers of Kaer Trolde and looked in a southerly direction one would see another island – the lonely secluded island of Faroe. It jutted from the water like the back of a giant fish rising out of the flat ocean.
Yennefer went down to the lower terraces and halted amongst a group of women whose pride and social status prevented them from running headlong to the beach and mixing with the excited mob. From there the alluvium seaport spread black and shapeless like the shaft of a sea crab.
From the sound between An Skellig and Spikeroog appeared the dragon boats one after another. Their red and white sails blazed in the sunlight and the bronze shields hanging on their sides flashed.
The Ring Horn comes first lectured one of the women. Then the Fenris…
The Trigla acknowledged another in an excited voice. Then the Drac… Behind them the Havfru…
The Anghira… Tamara… Daria… No that is the Scorpena… the Daria is missing. The Daria is missing…
A young pregnant woman with a thick blonde braid supported her belly with both hands moaned turned a dull pale color and fainted falling on the boards of the terrace like a ragged curtain from its rings. Yennefer jumped out immediately sank to her knees and pressed her fingers against the abdomen of the woman. She shouted a spell to suppress the spasms and convulsions and to strongly secure the tissue of the uterus and placenta together against the force that threatened to tear them apart. For safety she laid a soothing spell on the child whose legs she could feel kicking under her hands.
In order not to waste her magic strength she brought the woman to consciousness with a slap to the face. Take her away. Carefully.
Such a fool… said one of the elderly women. What was she thinking…
Quite headless… Perhaps her man lives maybe he is in a different boat…
Thank you for your help Lady Sorceress.
Take her away Yennefer repeated and stood up. She stifled a curse as she realized that her kneeling had caused her dress seam to burst.
She was still on the lower terrace. The dragon boats now ran onto the beach one after the other and the soldiers came ashore – the Skellige berserkers bearded and draped with weapons. Many wore white bandages. Many could only walk with the help of their companions. Some had to be carried.
The women huddled on the banks of Skellige began to recognize their men. If they were lucky they shouted and cried with happiness. If they were not they fainted. Or they departed – slowly quietly and without a word of complaint. Sometimes they looked around; hoping the red and white sails of the Daria would flash in the sound.
The Daria was missing.
Towering over the other heads of red hair Yennefer recognized Crach an Craite the Earl of Skellige who was one of the last to come ashore from the Ring Horn. The Earl shouted commands gave orders checked and looked after various issues. Two women watched him one blonde and the other dark-haired. They wept. With happiness. When he was finally convinced that he had taken care of everything the Earl went to the women gave them a bear hug and kissed them both. And then he looked up and saw Yennefer. His eyes began to gleam like the back of a brass plate and his sunburned face was as hard as the rock of a reef.
He knows thought the sorceress. News travels fast. The Earl found out while he was on tour that I had been caught in a net yesterday in the sound behind Spikeroog. He knew he would find me in Kaer Trolde.
Magic or pigeons?
He approached her slowly. He smelled of the sea salt tar and fatigue. She looked into his bright eyes and immediately her ears rang with the war cry of berserkers the fragmenting of shields the clanking of swords and axes. The roar of the slain. The roar of the people who jumped from the burning Daria into the sea.
Yennefer of Vengerberg.
Crach an Craite Earl of Skellige. She made a slight bow before him.
He did not return the bow. Not good she thought.
At that moment he saw her bruise a reminder of a blow with the oar and again his face hardened. His lips quivered and for a moment she could see his teeth. Whoever hit you will pay for it.
No one hit me. I stumbled on the stairs.
He looked at her attentively then shrugged his shoulders. If you do not want to lodge a complaint you do not have to. I have no time to launch an investigation. And now listen to what I have to say. Listen attentively because these will be the only words that I say to you.
Im listening.
Tomorrow you will be put on a dragon boat and taken to Novigrad. There you will be passed to the city government and later the government of Temeria or Redania whoever reaches you first. I know both have an equally strong desire to talk to you.
Is that all?
Almost. Just a statement that you deserve yes. The Skellige Islands has quite often granted asylum to people who were persecuted by the law. The islands do not lack options and opportunities to atone for debts by hard work courage sacrifice and blood. But not in your case Yennefer. Perhaps you expected such but Ill grant you no political asylum. I hate those such as yourself. I hate people who stir for powers sake who put their self-interest above all others conspiring with the enemy and betraying those to whom they owe not only obedience but also gratitude. I hate you Yennefer because when you and your Nilfgaardian cronies staged the uprising on Thanedd my dragon boats were in Attre. My boys were supporting the rebels there. Three hundred of my men stood against two thousand blacks! There must be a reward for bravery and loyalty and a punishment for wickedness and treachery! How should I reward those killed? With cenotaphs? Inscriptions carved into obelisks? No! I will reward the honored dead differently. Their blood which flowed into the dunes of Attre will be paid for by your blood Yennefer flowing through the planks of the scaffold.
I am innocent. I did not participate in the conspiracy of Vilgefortz.
You can present the evidence to the judges. I will not judge you.
Youve not only judged. Youve even set the punishment.
Enough talk! I said tomorrow at dawn you will be taken in chains to Novigrad before the royal court. To receive just punishment. But now give me your word that you will not try to use magic.
And if I do not give my word?
Marquard our magician was killed on Thanedd. We now have no magicians here who could keep you under control. But you should know that you will be under the constant surveillance of the best archers of Skellige. If you make even a suspicious hand gesture you will be shot.
Okay she nodded. I give my word.
Very good. Thank you. Farewell Yennefer. I will not see you off tomorrow.
Crach.
He turned on his heel. Im listening.
I have not the slightest intention of getting on board a ship bound for Novigrad. I have no time to prove to Dijkstra that I am innocent. I cannot risk that the evidence is already prepared for my case. I cannot risk that I will die shortly after the arrest of a sudden cerebral hemorrhage or commit suicide in my cell in a spectacular way. I can lose no time or take such risks. I cant explain why I cannot afford to take such risks. But I will not go to Novigrad.
He looked at her for a long time.
You will not he repeated. What could make you think you would be allowed this exception? Perhaps that we once had a loving relationship? Do not count on that Yennefer. The past is the past and was not written into the register.
I know and I do not count on it. Im not going to Novigrad Earl because I rush to the aid of a person who urgently needs me. A person whom I have sworn to never leave alone and unaided. And you Crach an Craite Earl of Skellige will help with my endeavor. After all youve made a similar vow. Ten years ago. To the same person. Ciri the granddaughter of Calanthe. The lion cub of Cintra. I Yennefer of Vengerberg care for Ciri as my daughter. That is why I am asking on her behalf that you keep your oath. The oath of Crach an Craite Earl of Skellige.
Really? Crach an Craite asked in amazement. Youre not even going to try them? Not one of these tasty morsels?
Really.
The Earl did not insist as he helped himself to a lobster from a shallow bowl put it on the table and struck it with a powerful but unerringly precise blow that cleaved the length of it. After he had poured plenty of lemon juice and garlic over it he began to pick the meat out of the shell. With his fingers.
Yennefer ate in a mannered fashion with a silver knife and a fork – but she ate a mutton chop which had surprised and probably offended the chef who had specially prepared the meal for them. For the sorceress wanted neither oysters nor mussels or the au-jus marinated salmon or the soup of Trigli and cockles or the steamed tail of angler fish or even the baked swordfish braised eel octopus crab lobster or sea​urchins. And also – especially – no fresh algae.
Anything that even remotely smelled of the sea reminded her of Fringilla Vigo and Philippa Eilhart – of the insanely risky teleportation the fall in the waves and the swallowed sea water. The way the algae floated in the bowl also reminded her of something. Of the algae that had been beaten to a pulp on her head and shoulders by the crippling painful blows of pine oars.
So I Crach took up the conversation again as he sucked the flesh from the broken leg joints of the lobster have decided to trust you Yennefer. You should know I do not do this for your sake. The Bloedgeas the blood oath that I gave in front of Calanthe practically binds my hands. So if you plan to help Ciri genuinely and honestly – which I assume is true – it seems to me that I have no choice but to help you in this endeavor…
Thank you. But please spare me that pathetic tone. I repeat: I did not participate in the conspiracy on Thanedd. Trust me.
He waved his hand. Is it so important what I think? You would do better to start with the kings and their agents around the world like Dijkstra. Then Philippa Eilhart and the loyal magicians. Who as you yourself have admitted you already faced and as a result have fled here to Skellige. You must have presented the evidence you had…
I have no evidence she interrupted him and angrily poked her fork in the sprouts which the cook had added to the insulting lamb chops. And if I did I would not present it. I cant explain what binds me to silence. But believe me Crach. I beg you.
I told you…
You did she cut him off. You told me you would help me. Thank you. But you still do not believe in my innocence. Believe it.
Crach eyed the last morsels in the lobster shell and then moved on to the bowl of mussels. He poked and rattled around inside the bowl searching for the largest.
Agreed he said finally wiping his hands on the tablecloth. I believe it. Because I want to believe it. But asylum and refuge I will not grant you. I cannot. You can leave the Skellige Islands whenever and to wherever you want. I would recommend hurrying. You are here as we say on the wings of magic. Others may arrive on your trail. They also know the spells.
I do not seek asylum or safe haven Earl. I search. I must hurry to help Ciri.
Ciri he repeated thoughtfully. The lion cub… She was a strange child.
Was?
Oh. Again he waved his hand. I spoke poorly. Was because she is no longer a child. I did not mean to upset you. Cirilla the lion cub of Cintra… She spent a summer and a winter in Skellige. More than once she caused chaos – but hey! That was an imp not a lion cub… Damn I already said… Yennefer various rumors have reached us from the mainland… Some say that Ciri is in Nilfgaard…
Shes not in Nilfgaard.
Others say that the girl is no more.
Yennefer remained silent biting her lip.
But with this second rumor the Earl said firmly I disagree. Ciri lives. Im sure of it. There has been no proof whatsoever… She is alive!
Yennefer raised her eyebrows but asked no questions. For a long time they were silent listening to the roar of the waves crashing against the cliffs of Ard Skellig.
Yennefer Crach said after a while there are other messages that have come from the continent. I understand that your witcher who stayed in Brokilon after the fight on Thanedd has set out from there to reach Nilfgaard and liberate Ciri.
I repeat Ciri is not in Nilfgaard. And what my witcher as you call him intends to do I do not know. But he… Crach its no secret that he and I… that I am sympathetic to him. But I know he will not save Ciri. He will achieve nothing. I know him. Hell get caught up lost in his own philosophizing and wallow in self pity. Hell vent his anger and hack at anyone and anything he comes across. Then in expiation hell do some grand but pointless deed. In the end hell be slain stupidly and needlessly most likely by a stab in the back.
It is said Crach threw in quickly frightened by the ominous changes and strange trembling voice of the sorceress that Ciri is his destiny. Ive seen it myself back in Cintra at Pavettas betrothal…
Predestination Yennefer sharply interrupted him can be interpreted in different ways. Very different ways. However time is too precious for such discussions. I repeat I do not know what hes up to and whether Geralt intends anything. I accept that. In my own way. And act Crach act. I do not care to sit here crying and holding my head in my hands. I will act!
The Earl raised his eyebrows but said nothing.
I will act repeated the sorceress. Ive been thinking of a plan. And you Crach will help me true to the oath that you have taken.
Im ready he announced firmly. Right now. The dragon boats are in the harbor. Command Yennefer.
She could not resist bursting into laughter.
Still the old man. No Crach no proof of courage and manliness is required. There will be no need to go to Nilfgaard and hew the golden door latch of their cities with an axe. I need less spectacular help. But more concrete… How are things with your treasury?
What?
Earl Crach an Craite. The help I need can be converted into currency.
It started the next day when it was light. In the rooms that had been made available to Yennefer a mad hustle dominated and Seneschal Guthlaf accommodated the sorceress – only with great difficulty.
Yennefer sat at a table and barely looked up from her papers. She counted and summed columns of presented invoices which had been hurried from the Treasury and the islands branch of the Cianfanelli Bank. She sketched and drew and the drawings and designs were immediately handed over to the artisans – alchemists goldsmiths glass blowers and jewelers.
For a while everything went smoothly then the trouble started.
Im sorry Lady Sorceress said Seneschal Guthlaf. What is not is not. We have given you all that we had. You might be able to accomplish miracles and magic but not us! Now Id like to note that the diamonds laid out before are worth a total value of…
What good is their value to me? she hissed. I have need of a diamond but it must be big. How so Master?
The jeweler looked again at the drawing. To do such and to cut such facets? At least thirty carats.
Such a stone Guthlaf stated categorically does not exist on Skellige.
Thats not true disagreed the jeweler. There is one.
How do you imagine that I do that Yennefer? Crach an Craite frowned. Shall I send out soldiers to take this temple by storm and plunder? Should I threaten the priestesses with my wrath if they do not give up the diamond? This is not an option. Im not particularly religious but a temple is a temple and priests are priests. I can only ask politely. I can specify how much it means to me and how big my gratitude will be. But it will always be only a request. A modest humble request.
A request may be granted?
Yes. An attempt will do no harm. What is there to lose? We two will travel to Hindarsfjall and recite this request. I will let the priestesses understand that I am keen. And then its up to you. Negotiate. Argue. Try bribery. Appeal to the ambition. Appeal to your common professions. Cry despairingly twist into convulsions excite pity… In all act like a monkfish. Shall I give lessons Yennefer?
There is no use Crach. A sorceress will never find a common ground with a priestess. Both are too certain about… ideological differences. And to allow a sorceress to use a holy relic or artifact… No forget it. There is no chance…
What do you need with this diamond anyway?
To build a window for telecommunications. That is a megascope. I have to convince a couple of people to agree with me.
Magic? Over long distance?
If it would be sufficient to climb the highest tower of Kaer Trolde and shout out loud I would not bother you.
The gulls and petrels screamed as they circled over the water. On the steep rocks and reefs of Hindarsfjall the penetrating chirps of nesting Red-billed Oystercatchers mixed with the hoarse croaking and chattering of Yellow-Headed Boobys. A black Sea Cormorant with her bonnet observed the approaching ship with sparkling green eyes.
That huge rock towering over the water explained Crach an Craite as he leaned on the railing is Kaer Hemdall the guardian Hemdall who shall be awakened. Hemdall is our mythical hero. According to legend when Tedd Deireádh comes – the time of the end the time of the white cold and storms of the wolf – Hemdall will awaken to battle the evil powers of the land of Morhögg – the specters demons and phantoms of chaos. He will stand upon a rainbow bridge and blow his horn as a sign that it is time to take up arms and march. To Ragh Nar Roog the last battle which will decide whether the night falls down or the morning comes.
The ship danced through the waves and slipped into the calmer waters of a bay between the guardian Hemdalls rock and another just as fantastically shaped.
The smaller rock is Kambi said the Earl. Kambi in our myths is a golden rooster that crows to awaken Hemdall and warn him that Naglfar is approaching the infernal dragon ship that carries the army of Chaos – the demons and specters from Morhögg. Naglfar is built from the fingernails of the dead. You wouldnt believe it Yennefer but there are still people on the Skellige Islands who cut off dead mens nails before a funeral in order to prevent the specters of Morhögg from receiving building materials.
I believe it. I know the power of legends.
The fjord shielded them somewhat from the wind and the sails began to beat.
Blast the horn Crach ordered the crew. Let the holy women know that we come to visit.
The building which was at the upper end of a long stone staircase looked like a giant hedgehog – it was overgrown with so much of moss ivy and shrubbery. Up on its roof Yennefer noticed not only shrubs but even small trees.
There is the temple now confirmed Crach. The grove that surrounds it is also a place of worship. Here take forth the sacred mistletoe. On Skellige as you know everything is decorated with mistletoe – from the cradle of the newborn to the grave… Watch out the stairs are slippery… religion hehe overgrown with moss… Come Ill take you by the arm… Still the same kind of perfume… Yenna…
Crach. I beg you. The past is the past and was not written into the register.
Forgive me. Lets go.
A couple of young and silent priestesses waited in front of the temple. The Earl greeted them politely and expressed a desire to speak with their leader who he called Modron Sigrdrifa. They went inside which was illuminated by beams of light that shone through high-lying glass windows. One of these beams of light illuminated the altar.
A hundred monkfish muttered Crach an Craite. I forgot how great it is this Brisingamen. I have not been here since my childhood… with this you could probably buy all the shipyards in Cidaris. Together with the work of the people and annual production.
The Earl was exaggerating. But not by much.
Above the modest marble altar over the figures of cats and hawks on the stone shell of the votive offerings rose the statue of Modron Freyja The Great Mother in her typical motherly aspect – a woman in flowing robes her pregnancy revealed and exaggerated by one of the sculptors. With her head bowed and facial features covered with a cloth. Above the folded hands on her breast was a diamond the goddess was wearing as part of a golden necklace. The diamond had a slightly bluish hue. It was large. Very large.
An estimated one hundred and fifty carats.
One would not even need cut it whispered Yennefer. It has a rosette cut exactly what I need. Just the right facets for the refraction of light…
That means were in luck.
Hardly. Here they are priestesses and Im an ungodly witch to be thrown out in disgrace.
Youre exaggerating?
Not a bit.
Be welcome Earl in the temple of the Mother. Be thou also welcome worthy Yennefer of Vengerberg.
Crach an Craite bowed. Hail Revered Mother Sigrdrifa.
The priestess was tall almost as big as Crach – and that meant that she was a head taller than Yennefer. She had light hair and eyes and an elongated not very pretty and not very womanly face.
I have seen her somewhere thought Yennefer. Recently. Where?
On the steps of Kaer Trolde leading to the seaport the priestess reminded her smiling. When the ships arrived in the sound. I stood over you as you helped a pregnant woman who was about to lose her child. On your knees without worrying about your very expensive camlet dress. I saw that. And will never again tell stories of callous and calculating sorceresses.
Yennefer cleared her throat and bowed her head.
You stand before the altar of the Mother Yennefer. So you might be given her grace.
Revered Mother I… I would humbly ask you…
Do not say anything. Earl you no doubt have a lot to do. Leave us alone here on Hindarsfjall. We are able to communicate. We are women. It does not matter what profession we pursue or who we are: We are virgins mothers and crones. Kneel down next to me Yennefer. Bow your head to the Mother.
Take the Brisingamen from the Goddess neck? repeated Sigrdrifa the disbelief in her voice battling holy outrage. No Yennefer. That is simply impossible. It does not even matter that I would not dare… Even if I would dare the Brisingamen cannot be removed. The necklace has no clasp. It is connected with the statue.
Yennefer remained silent for a long moment measuring the priestess with a calm eye. If I had known she said coldly I would have left immediately with the Earl for Ard Skellig. No no I think the time I spent talking to you was by no means wasted. But I have very little of it. Truly very little. I confess your kindness and warmth misled me a little…
I wish you well Sigrdrifa interrupted her indifferently. Also I approve of your plans with all my heart. I knew Ciri. I loved that child; her fate moved me. I admire you for the determination with which you rush to help the child. I will fulfil your every wish. But not the Brisingamen Yennefer. Not the Brisingamen. Please do not ask.
Sigrdrifa to come to Ciris rescue I have to quickly acquire some knowledge. Some information. Without it I am powerless. Knowledge and information that I can only get in the way of telecommunications. In order to communicate over long distances I need to construct with the help of magic a magic artifact. A megascope.
A device such as your famous crystal ball?
Much more complicated. A crystal ball allows telecommunications only with a different ball that has been attuned to it. A dwarf at the local bank even has a crystal ball – to communicate with the ball in the vault. A megascope offers somewhat greater opportunities… But why theorize? Without the diamond it does not matter anyway. Well Ill say goodbye…
Not so fast.
Sigrdrifa got up walked through the nave and stopped in front of the altar and the statue of Modron Freyja. The Goddess she said is also the patron of psychics. Of clairvoyant women. Of telepaths. This is symbolized by the sacred animals: the cat who watches and listens in secret and the falcon who looks down from high above. It is symbolized by the jewel of the Goddess: the Brisingamen the collar of clairvoyance. Why build any seeing and listening devices Yennefer? Is it not easier to turn to the Goddess for help?
Yennefer restrained herself from cursing at the last moment. After all this was a place of worship.
It is almost time for the evening prayer continued Sigrdrifa. Together with the other priestesses I will dedicate my time to meditation. Im going to ask the Goddess to help Ciri. For Ciri was here in this temple many a time and has many a time seen the Brisingamen on the neck of the Great Mother. Sacrifice another hour or two of your valuable time Yennefer. Stay here with us for the time of prayer. Support me while I pray. With your thoughts and your presence.
Sigrdrifa…
Please. Do it for me. And for Ciri.
The jewelled Brisingamen. On the neck of the Goddess.
She stifled a yawn. At least if there were any songs any petitions any mysteries… some mystical folklore… it would be less boring sleep would not impose itself in this way. But they just kneel there and put their heads down. Motionless Silent.
But yes they can use the Power if they want to sometimes no worse than we sorceresses. It is still a mystery how they do it. No preparation no training no studies… Only prayer and meditation. Divination? A kind of self-hypnosis? Thats what Tissaia de Vries claimed… They unconsciously enter a trance and gain energy and the ability to manipulate it much like we do with our spells. They convert that energy and see this as a gift and the grace of God. That belief gives them strength.
Why are we sorceresses never successful in the same way?
Should I try it? Make use of the atmosphere and the aura of this place? I might even be put in a trance… I needed only to look at that diamond… the Brisingamen… To concentrate on how brilliantly it would play its part in my megascope…
Brisingamen… It sparkles like the morning star there in the dark the smoke of incense and smoky candles…
Yennefer.
She lifted her head suddenly.
It was dark in the temple. It smelled strongly of smoke.
Did I fall asleep? Forgive me…
There is nothing to forgive. Come with me.
Outside the sky flashed with flickering lights that were changing like a kaleidoscope. Northern Lights? Yennefer rubbed her eyes in surprise. Aurora Borealis? In August?
How much will you sacrifice Yennefer?
What?
Are you willing to sacrifice yourself? Your priceless magic?
Sigrdrifa she said angrily. Do not try these hackneyed tricks with me. Im ninety-four years old. But please do not treat that as a confession. I trust you just to let you know that you cannot treat me like a child.
You have not answered my question.
And I will not. Because I do not agree with this mysticism. I fell asleep at your service. I got bored. Because I do not believe in your goddess.
Sigrdrifa turned around and Yennefer involuntarily took a very deep breath.
Your disbelief is not too flattering for me said the woman whose eyes were full of liquid gold. But does your disbelief do anything?
The only action Yennefer could take was to exhale.
A time will come said the golden-eyed woman when no one absolutely no one except children will believe in witches. I say this to be deliberately malicious. As revenge. Lets go.
No… Yennefer was finally able to break through the passive inhalation and exhalation. No! I will not go anywhere. Enough! This is an enchantment or hypnosis. An illusion! A trance! I have trained defense mechanisms… I can let everything be scattered with only a saying oh yes! Damn…
The golden-eyed woman approached. The diamond on her necklace flared like the morning star.
Your language gradually ceases to serve mutual understanding she said. It is art for arts sake all the more incomprehensible the deeper and wiser you try to be. Really you would do better to say nothing but ah-ah and gu-gu. Come on.
Its an illusion a trance… I will not go anywhere!
I will not force you. That would be shameful. Youre an intelligent proud girl. Have character.
A plain. A sea of grass. Heath. A rock that rises from the heather like the back of a lurking predator.
You have asked for my jewel Yennefer. I cannot give it to you not without making sure of certain things beforehand. I want to see whats inside you. Thats why I brought you here to this place which has been a place of knowledge and power from time immemorial. Your priceless magic is supposed to be everywhere. All you have to do is reach out for it. Are you afraid to stretch for it?
Yennefer could not bring any sound out of her constricted throat.
The power to change the world cannot be named said the woman Yet you recognize chaos art and science? Curses blessings and progress? But coincidentally not faith? Love? Sacrifice?
Are you listening? The rooster Kambi crows. The wave hits the shore the bow wave of Naglfar. Hemdall will sound his horn on the rainbow Bifrost for those who would face the enemy. It is the white cold the storm winds and blowing snow… The ground shakes from the violent movements of the snake…
The wolf swallows the sun. The moon is black. There is only cold and darkness. Hatred revenge and blood…
Whose side will you choose Yennefer? Will you be at the eastern or the western edge of Bifrost? Will you be with Hemdall or against him?
The rooster Kambi crows.
Make up your mind Yennefer. Make your choice. For one once gave you life so that you could make your choice at the right moment.
Light or dark?
Good and evil light and dark order and chaos? These are just symbols but in reality there is no such polarity! Light and darkness are in each a little of this and a little of that. This conversation is pointless. Pointless. Im not going to convert to mysticism. For you or for the wolf that devours the sun Sigrdrifa. For me this is an eclipse. And so it should remain.
Remain? How?
She felt the earth slip away under her feet felt the monstrous force twist her arms and break the joints in her shoulders and elbows felt the vortex as the Strappado-Torture stretched. She screamed in pain writhing opening her eyes. No this was no dream. This could be no dream. She was on a tree hanging crucified on the branches of a huge ash tree. Above her high up a hawk circled and on the ground in the darkness she heard a hissing snake the rustle of her rubbing against other joints.
Something moved beside her. Next to her arm was a stretched and anguished squirrel.
Are you ready now? asked the squirrel. Are you willing to sacrifice? What are you willing to sacrifice?
I have nothing! The pain blinded and paralyzed her. And even if I had anything I do not believe in the meaning of such sacrifice! I do not want to suffer for millions! I do not want to suffer at all! For anybody!
No one wants to suffer. But that is the fate of each. And some suffer more. Not necessarily of their own volition. Its not about enduring the suffering. Its about how you endure it.
Jana! Janchen!
Take this hunchbacked monster away from me! I do not want to see it!
This is your daughter just like mine.
Really? The children I have fathered are normal.
How dare you insinuate… to…
There were sorceresses in your elven family. You aborted your first pregnancy. It follows that your elf blood and womb are spoiled woman. Why do you bring this monster into the world?
This unfortunate child… This was the will of the gods! This is your daughter just like mine! What should I do? Strangle her? Tie off the umbilical cord? What do want from me? To go into the forest and leave her there? What do you want from me by the gods?
Dad! Mama!
Go away you monster.
How dare you? How dare you to hit the child? Stop? Where are you going? Where? To her yes? To her!
Indeed woman. I am a man I can appease my desire where I want when I want. This is my birthright. And you make me sick. You and the fruit of your correspondingly degenerate belly. Do not wait for dinner. I will not come back tonight.
Mama…
Why are you crying?
Why did you hit me and push me away? I was good…
Mama! Dear Mama!
Are you able to forgive?
I have long since forgiven.
After you avenged only too well.
Yes.
Are you sorry?
No.
Pain terrible pain that ate away her hands and fingers.
Yes Im guilty! Did you hear that? Confession and repentance? Did you hear how Yennefer of Vengerberg repented and humbled herself? No I do not do this favor for you. I confess my sins and I expect the punishment. But I will not beg you for mercy!
The pain reached the limits of what a person could endure.
You reminded me of the betrayed the duped the exploited; you reminded me of he who died by his own hand by my hand… The fact that I once laid hands on myself? I obviously had reasons! And I have no regrets! And even if I could turn back time… I have no regrets.
The hawk perched on her shoulder. The Tower of the Swallow. The Tower of the Swallow. Hasten to the Tower of the Swallow. Daughter.
The rooster Kambi crows.
Ciri on a black mare her gray hair blowing in the gallop. Blood flows and gushes from her face a bright vivid red. The black mare rises like a bird glides smoothly over the beams of the arch. Ciri sways in the saddle but does not fall…
Ciri in the middle of the night amidst a wilderness of rock and sand with raised hands from her hands shoots out a glowing sphere… A unicorn pawing in the gravel with his hoof… Many unicorns… Fire… Fire…
Geralt on a bridge. In a fight. In a fire. The flames reflected on his sword blade.
Fringilla Vigo her green eyes wide-open with lust her dark close-cropped head on an open book on the frontispiece… You can see a fragment of the title: Reflections on the Inevitable Death of…
Geralts eyes reflected in the eyes of Fringilla.
An abyss. Smoke. A flight of stairs that leads down. A flight of stairs that you have to take. Something ends. Tedd Deireádh comes the time of the end…
Darkness. Moisture. Intensely cold stone walls. The coldness of the iron on the wrists the ankles. The pain that pulsates in tortured hands tears at bruised fingers…
Ciri holds her hand. A long dark corridor stone columns statues perhaps… Darkness. A whisper as quiet as the whisper of the wind.
Doors. An infinite number of doors with huge heavy wings open silently in front of them. And in the end in the impenetrable darkness a door that does not open automatically. You may not open it.
If you are afraid turn back.
That door mustnt be opened. You know that.
I do.
But youre still leading me there. If you are afraid turn back. You still have time to turn back. Its still not too late.
And you?
For me it is too late.
The rooster Kambi crows.
Tedd Deireádh has come.
The Aurora Borealis.
Light.
Yennefer. Wake up.
She threw up her head. She looked at her hands. She had both. Salvation.
Sigrdrifa? I fell asleep…
Come.
Where? she whispered. Where to this time?
What? I do not understand. You have to see. Something has happened… Something strange. None of us knows why or how this can be explained. But I can guess. The grace… You may have fallen to the grace of the goddess Yennefer.
What are you talking about Sigrdrifa?
Look.
She looked up. And sighed loudly.
Brisingamen the sacred jewel of Modron Freyja no longer hung on the neck of the goddess. It lay at her feet.
Do I hear you right? Crach an Craite asked again. You are going to establish your magical workshop on Hindarsfjall? The priestesses gave the sacred diamond to you? You can use it in your infernal machine?
Yes.
Well well Yennefer have you converted then? What happened there on the island?
It doesnt matter. Im returning to the temple and thats final.
And the financial resources for which you have asked? Will they still be needed?
Probably yes.
Seneschal Guthlaf will fulfil your every relevant arrangement. But Yennefer give these orders quickly. Hurry. I have received new messages.
Damn I was afraid of that. Do they know where I am?
No they do not know yet. But I have been warned that you could show up on the Skellige Islands and was told to jail you immediately if you do. I am also supposed to take war prisoners and extort information from them – any crumb of information that concerns you. Or your stay in Nilfgaard and the provinces. Yennefer hurry. If they track you down and find you here in Skellige I would find myself in somewhat of a difficult situation.
I am doing everything in my power to hurry. Also to make sure that you will not be compromised. Do not worry.
Crach bared his teeth. I said somewhat. Im not afraid of them. Neither the kings nor the magicians. They cannot hurt me because they need me. And the assistance I have provided to you has been committed under my oath of allegiance. Yes yes you heard right. Formally Im still a vassal of the crown of Cintra. Cirilla has a formal claim to that crown. As the representative of Cirilla as her only guardian you have a formal right to order me and to demand obedience and service.
Casuistic quibble.
Sure. He laughed. I myself will call it such loudly if after all it turns out that Emhyr var Emreis has forced the girl to marry him. Even if Ciri is ruled out by any legal maneuverings of the throne and someone else takes her place such as that idiot Vissegerd. Then I will immediately renounce my oath of obedience and fealty.
What if Yennefer narrowed her eyes it turns out that despite everything Ciri is dead?
Shes alive said Crach firmly. I know she is safe.
How?
You would not believe me.
Try me.
The blood of the queens of Cintra began Crach in a thoughtful tone is strangely connected with the sea. If a woman of this blood dies the sea falls into true madness. It is said that Ard Skellig mourns Riannons daughters. Because the storms are so strong that the west waves permeate the island waves attacking cracks and caves until they suddenly seep from the rock salt rivulets on the east side. And the whole island shakes. The common people say Ard Skellig sobs. Again someone has died. The blood of Riannon has died. The elder blood.
Yennefer was silent.
This is no fairy tale continued Crach. Ive seen it myself with my own eyes. Three times. After the death of Adalia the Seer after the death of Calanthe… And after the death Pavetta the mother of Ciri.
Pavetta remarked Yennefer was killed during a storm so one can hardly say that…
Pavetta interrupted Crach still thoughtfully was not killed during a storm. The assault began after her death. The sea as usual responded to the death of someone of Cinterein blood. I have examined this matter for a sufficiently long time. And I am certain.
How are you so certain?
The ship that carried Pavetta and Duny disappeared over the Sedna-Depth. Theirs was not the first ship to have disappeared there. Surely you know about this.
A fairy tale. Ships suffer disasters which is a pretty natural thing…
On the Skellige Islands he interrupted sharply and continued we know enough of ships and seafaring to distinguish between natural and unnatural disasters. Ships go under above the Sedna-Depth unnaturally. And it is no coincidence. This also applies to the ship that Pavetta and Duny were travelling on.
I do not want to argue the sorceress sighed. What does it even matter? After nearly fifteen years?
For me it plays a… The Earl pressed his lips together. Ill clarify this matter. It is only a matter of time. I know Ill… Declarations will be found. Im going to find explanations for all the mysteries. Including the time of the massacre of Cintra…
Whats that again about a mystery?
When the Nilfgaardians stormed Cintra he murmured as he looked out the window Calanthe gave orders to secretly evacuate the girl from the city. The city was burning but already the blacks were everywhere the chances of breaking out of the siege were negligible. The Queen had been advised of the risk. Her advisors suggested Ciri might formally surrender to the Nilfgaardian army leaders and thus save her life and the Cinterein line of royalty. In the burning streets she would inevitably and futilely die at the hands of the mobs of soldiers. But the lioness… Do you know what she is supposed to have said according to witnesses?
No.
Better that the blood of the girl flows on the pavement of Cintra than it be desecrated. How would it be desecrated?
Through her marriage to Emperor Emhyr. The infamous Nilfgaardian. Earl its late. I start at dawn tomorrow morning… I will keep you informed and up-to-date on the progress made.
I count on it. Good night Yenna… Hmmm…
What Crach?
I was wondering if you would like to well…hmmm…as lust would have it…
No Earl. The past is the past and was not written into the register. Good night.
Well well. Crach an Craite glanced at his visitor his head tilted to one side. Triss Merigold in person. What an exceptionally pretty dress. And the lining… Thats chinchilla is it not? I would ask what leads you to the Skellige… if I did not already know. But I do know.
Very good. Triss smiled seductively flipping her beautiful auburn hair. Very well you know Earl. That saves us the introduction and the introductory statements so we can immediately get down to business.
For what purpose? Crach folded his arms across his chest and measured the sorceress with a cold stare. What statements do you reckon we should start with? Who do you represent Triss? In whose name are you here? King Foltest granted you employment as a reward for your services with a curse. But now he has driven you out of Temeria even though youre guilty of nothing. So Ive heard Philippa Eilhart has taken you under her wing. Philippa who is currently working with Dijkstra and the de facto government of Redania. I see that you are thanking her for her asylum as well as possible. You dont even hesitate to take on the role of a spy who is to track down her former friend.
You insult me Earl.
I humbly ask for forgiveness. If I have erred. Was I wrong?
They were silent for long measuring each other with suspicious eyes.
Finally Triss waved swore and stamped her heel. Oh damn! Let us stop leading each other around by the nose! What it does it matter now who serves whom who is on whose side and who remained loyal to whom for what reasons? Yennefer is no longer alive. It is still not known where Ciri is and in whose power… What is the sense of this secrecy? I did not come as a spy Crach. I came out of my own accord as a private person. Guided by concern for Ciri.
Many are concerned for Ciri. The girl is very lucky. Triss eyes flashed. I would not mock it. Especially not in your place.
Forgive me.
They fell silent looking out the window at the red sun setting behind the wooded peaks of Spikeroog.
Triss Merigold.
Yes Earl.
I would like to invite you to dinner. Ah yes the cook wants to know whether all the sorceresses despise seafood.
Triss did not disdain the seafood. On the contrary she ate twice as much as she had planned and now began to worry about her waist – those twenty-two inches of which she was so proud. She decided to promote the digestion with white wine made with the famous Toussaint Est Est. She drank from a horn with Crach.
So Yennefer Triss continued the conversation turned up here on the nineteenth day of August by spectacularly falling from the sky into a fishing net. You a loyal vassal of Cintra granted her asylum. You helped her build a megascope… And of course you know with whom she spoke and what about.
Crach an Craite took a swig from the horn and stifled a belch. I do not know. He smiled slyly. Of course I know nothing. How should I a poor and simple sailor know anything about the activities of a powerful sorceress?
Sigrdrifa the priestess of Modron Freyja bowed her head low as if the Earls conversation dragged her down like a thousand-pound weight. She trusts me Earl she murmured almost inaudibly. She has not asked that I promise not to disclose but discretion was obviously implied. I really do not know if…
Modron Sigrdrifa Crach an Craite interrupted seriously. What I ask for is not a betrayal. Like you I support Yennefer. Like you I hope that she finds and rescues Ciri. Ha Ive taken a Bloedgeas – a blood oath! But Yennefer worries me I am guided by concern for her. She is an inordinately proud woman. Even if she had to undertake a very great risk she would not be reduced to asking for assistance. Therefore it may be necessary to rush to help her unbidden. To do this I need information.
Sigrdrifa cleared her throat. Her face was expressionless.
But as she spoke her voice trembled a little. She has designed this machine… Actually thats not a machine because there is no mechanism only two mirrors a black velvet curtain the housing two lenses four lamps and of course the Brisingamen… If she says a spell the two lamps light and…
Lets leave out the details. With whom does she communicate?
She has spoken with several people. With sorcerers… Earl I have not heard much but from what I have heard… there are not really any worthy people among them. None of them unselfishly wanted to help… They have asked for money… They have all asked for money…
I know murmured Crach. Ive seen the transfers shes made from my bank account. A pretty oi a beautiful chunk of money my oath has cost me! But money comes and goes. What Ive spent on Yennefer and Ciri Im going to repeat on the Nilfgaardian provinces. But keep talking Mother Sigrdrifa.
Some the priestess bowed her head Yennefer blackmailed easily. She indicated that she was in possession of compromising information and that if cooperation was refused she would reveal it to the whole world… Earl… she is a wise and good woman all in all… But she has no qualms at all. She is ruthless. And merciless.
I know that all too well. On the other hand on the details of extortion I want to know nothing and I advise you to forget it as quickly as possible. This is dangerous knowledge. Outsiders should not play with such fire.
I know Earl. I owe obedience… and I think that your goals justify the means. No one else will learn anything from me. Neither the friend nor the friendly chatter of the enemy during torture.
Well Modron Sigrdrifa. Very good… What was discussed in the communications do you remember?
I didnt always understand everything Earl. They used a jargon that was difficult to understand… There was often talk of a certain Vilgefortz…
Of course. Crach ground his teeth audibly. The priestess gave him a frightened look. Much was also said of the elves and the elder speech she said. And about magic portals. Even from the Sedna-Depth… But most of all I think it was about towers.
Towers?
Yes. Two of them. The Tower of Gulls and the Tower of the Swallow.
As I suspected said Triss. Yennefer found out about the first secret report of the Radcliffe Commission which investigated the events on Thanedd. I do not know what news of the affair penetrated here to Skellige… Have you heard of the portal in the Tower of Gulls? And the Radcliffe Commission?
Crach an Craite looked at the sorceress suspiciously. Here on the island he sounded sour neither politics nor culture penetrate. We are isolated.
Triss thought it appropriate to note neither his voice nor his face. The Radcliffe Commission examined the tracks leading away from the Thanedd teleportation portal. The teleportation portal of Tor Lara located on the island was disabled as long as the magical blocks of the Tower existed in any considerable degree. But as you without a doubt know the Tower of Gulls exploded and collapsed which made teleportation possible. Most of those who were involved in the events on Thanedd left the island through teleportation.
Indeed The Earl smiled. For example your flight directly into Brokilon. With a witcher on your back.
There you go. Triss looked into his eyes. Neither politics nor culture penetrate here but rumors do. But lets leave that for now. We turn again to the work of the Radcliffe Commission. The Commissions aim was to determine exactly who teleported from Thanedd. They used a so-called Synopse a spell that can reflect an image of past events. They also detected traces of teleportation and correlated them with the directions in which they lead subsequently identifying the specific individuals who have opened a portal. We succeeded in virtually all cases. Except one. A teleportation trail that led nowhere. More specifically into the sea. Into the Sedna-Depth.
Someone the Earl realized immediately teleported to a ship waiting at an agreed location. Strange that they teleported over such a long distance… and to such a notorious place. Well if you have a knife to your throat…
Exactly. The Commission also thinks so. And thus has formulated the following conclusion: Vilgefortz kidnapped Ciri but had no other escape route so he had to use the emergency exit – he teleported with the girl to the Sedna-Depth to a Nilfgaardian ship waiting there. The Commissions conclusion is supported by the fact that Ciri was presented at the imperial court in Loc Grim on the tenth of July just ten days after the events on Thanedd.
Well the Earls eyes narrowed that explains a lot. Of course under the assumption that the Commission did not err.
Naturally. The enchantress held his gaze even allowing herself a wry smile. Loc Grim of course may have just been a look-alike not the real Ciri. That would also explain a lot. It would explain another fact that the Radcliffe Commission has determined. Such a curious fact that it wasnt even mentioned in the first version of the report as it was deemed too unlikely. It was however in the second top-secret version of the report. As a hypothesis.
Ive been all ears for some time Triss.
The hypothesis of the Commission is thus: The teleport in the Tower of Gulls came into function. Someone walked through it and the energy of this passage was so great that the teleport exploded and was destroyed.
Yennefer Triss continued after a short silence must have guessed what the Radcliffe Commission found out. What has been firmly kept in the secret report. There is a chance… a shadow of a chance… that Ciri was the one who travelled through the portal of Tor Lara. That she escaped Nilfgaard and Vilgefortz…
Where is she then?
I would also like to know that.
It was devilishly dark out. The clouds clustered together to hide the moon behind them letting through almost no light. Compared to the exceedingly windy previous night however there was little wind and therefore it did not feel so cold. The little boat rocked on the rippling waves of water. It smelled like mud. And like rotting plants. And like ashes.
Somewhere on the bank a beavers tail hit the water so that they both jumped. Ciri was sure that Vysogota had dozed off and that the beaver had woken him.
Tell me more she said wiping her nose on a clean not-covered-with-mucus part of her sleeve. Dont sleep. If you doze off and I fall asleep too we will be carried by the current and will wake up in the sea! Tell me more of this teleporting!
When you fled from Thanedd continued the hermit you went through the portal at Tor Lara the Tower of Gulls. However Geoffrey Monck – who is the highest authority in matters of teleportation and the author of a book titled The Magic of the Elder Races which is the magnum opus of knowledge of elven teleports – writes that the portal at Tor Lara leads to Tor Zireael The Tower of the Swallow…
The portal at Thanedd was broken interrupted Ciri. Maybe before it broke down it lead to a tower. But now it leads to the desert. It is called a chaotic portal. Ive studied this.
Imagine that so have I snorted the old man. Much of which I remember. Thats why I wonder about your story… about some parts of it. And concerning the teleportation…
Can you speak more clearly?
Can I Ciri? I can. But now its high time to haul in the trap. There are bound to be eels in it. Ready?
Ready. Ciri spat on her hands and grabbed the boat hook. Vysogota reeled in the vanishing line from the water.
Out with it. Hee… eave! And into the boat! Catch them Ciri hurry! Into the basket otherwise theyll get away!
This was the second night they had gone out into the marshy tributary of the river and laid fish traps for the eels that migrated to the sea en masse. They returned to the hut well after midnight; wet tired and covered from top-to-bottom with slime.
But all the same they did not go to sleep. The catch intended for commercial exchange had to be packed into boxes and sealed well – if the eels found even the smallest gap there would not be a single one left in the morning. When they had finished working Vysogota pulled out two or three of the fattest eels from the basket cut them into pieces rolled them in flour and fried them in a huge pan. Then they ate and talked.
You know Ciri something still keeps me awake at night. I have not forgotten what we disagreed about just after your recovery. About the date and the wound on your cheek that made the most accurate calendar imaginable. This wound could not be more than ten hours old but you insisted it had been four days since you were wounded. Although I was sure this was a common mistake I could not stop thinking about it. So I asked myself the question: Where did these four lost days go?
And? Where have they been in your opinion?
I do not know.
Wonderful so…
The cat interrupted her sentence by pouncing on a thin squeaking mouse. The cat casually bit its throat tore out its entrails and then began to eat with an appetite. Ciri looked on indifferently.
The portal at the Tower of Gulls resumed Vysogota leads to the Tower of the Swallow. The Tower of the Swallow but…
The cat had eaten the mouse leaving only the tail for dessert.
The portal from Tor Lara said Ciri as she yawned heartily is broken and leads to the desert. Thats what Ive told you more than a hundred times.
That doesnt matter for the moment. There is a connection between these two portals. The portal in Tor Lara is broken. But there is another portal in Tor Zireael. If you could get to the Tower of the Swallow you could teleport yourself back to the island of Thanedd. You would be distanced from the danger that threatens you out of the reach of your enemies.
Ha! That would suit me. There is only one small problem. I have no idea where this Tower of the Swallow is.
I however may be able to improve that situation. Ciri do you know what earns a man his college degree?
No. What?
His ability to use sources.
I knew it Vysogota said proudly Ive found it. I searched and searched and… Oh crap…
The stack of heavy books slipped from his fingers and the incunabula clattered to the ground. The pages fell from the crumbling bindings and scattered around randomly.
What have you found? Ciri knelt down beside him helping him collect the scattered pages.
The Tower of the Swallow! The hermit shooed away the cat who had seated himself on one of the pages. Tor Zireael. Help me.
This is dusty! The sticks! Vysogota? What is this? Here in this picture? This man who hangs from a tree?
That? Vysogota looked at the loose page. A scene from the legend of Hemdall. The hero Hemdall hung for nine days and nine nights on the world-ash tree to gain knowledge and power through sacrifice and pain.
Ciri rubbed her forehead. I have dreamed such a thing a few times before. A man hanging from a tree…
The engraving has… since fallen out of this book. If you want you can read it later. But the most important thing now… alas I finally have it. Walks on Trails and Places of Magic by Buyvid Backhuysen a book known for its somewhat apocryphal…
That means fraudulent?
More or less. But there are always some people that know how to appreciate a book… So listen… Damn it is dark in here…
Its bright enough youre simply going blind in your old age Ciri said with the careless cruelty of youth. Give it to me Ill read it myself. Where should I start?
Here he pointed his bony finger. Read it aloud.
This Buyvid wrote strangely. Assengard was probably something like a palace if Im not mistaken. But what is this country: Hundredlakes? Ive never heard of it before. And what is Trifolium?
Clover. And Ill tell you of the Hundredlakes of Assengard after youve finished reading.
And no sooner had the elf Avallach spoken these words than a little black bird flew quickly out from under the waters of the lake in whose depths it had found refuge throughout the entire winter. The swallow as learned men know well does not fly away in autumn and return in the spring like the other birds but gathers its small claws into large clusters and sinks to the bottom of the water so that it survives there the entire winter period until spring comes and they fly out of the water. Because of this the swallow is not only a symbol of spring and hope but also an example of immaculate purity because it never lands on the ground and has no contact with earthly dirt and filth.
But let us return to our lake: The circling bird must have fancied us because he scattered the mist with his little wings and a wondrous magical tower emerged unexpectedly out of the mist. We all sighed as one in amazement because this tower whose foundation was woven from mist and fog was crowned at the top by a sparkling glow like a magical aurora borealis. Verily the tower had to be built with powerful magical arts for it was incomprehensible to human intellect.
The elf Avallach was aware of our admiration and said That is Tor Zireael the Tower of the Swallow. This is the Crossroads of the Worlds and the Gates of Time. Rejoice men that your eyes have seen this sight because not all can see it and not at all times.
When asked however if we could approach and behold the magnificent tower from nearer Avallach laughed. Tor Zireael he said is but a dream for you you do not touch a dream. And that is good he added because the tower serves only the knowledgeable and chosen few for the Gate of Time is the door to hope and rebirth. But for the common people it is the gateway to nightmares. He had hardly uttered these words when the fog rose up again and our eyes failed to behold that magical sight…
The landscape of Hundredlakes Vysogota said is now Mil Trachta. It is very broad sliced through by the Yelena River which cuts through lakes in the northern part of Metinna near the border of Nazair and Mag Turga. Buyvid Backhuysen writes that they travelled south to the lake from Assengard… Today Assengard is no more only its ruins remain and the closest town is Neunreuth. Buyvid counted sixteen leagues from Assengard. Many different lengths of measurement were used then but if we use the most common we can deduce that sixteen of their leagues is about fifty of our miles. We are in Pereplut about three hundred and fifty miles to the south of Assengard. In other words Ciri you are only separated from the Tower of the Swallow by three hundred miles give or take. On your Kelpie it would likely only take you six weeks to get there. In the spring of course. Not now because frost is possible in a day or two.
Assengard from what Ive read Ciri murmured pulling her nose thoughtfully is only ruins of the past now. And I have seen the ruins of the elven city of Shaerrawedd in Kaedwen with my own eyes. Ive been there. People have looted and taken everything leaving only the bare stones behind. I bet that only the stones of your Tower of the Swallow remain and only the larger ones at that – the smaller ones have surely been stolen. If there was a portal there…
Tor Zireael was magical. It was not visible to all. And portals are never to be seen.
True she admitted and became thoughtful. The portal on Thanedd was certainly not visible. It appeared suddenly on a bare wall… incidentally just in time because the magician who was pursuing me was closing in… I could hear him… and then as if on command the portal appeared.
Im sure Vysogota said quietly if you went to Tor Zireael the portal there would reveal itself to you as well. Even if it were in ruins surrounded by bare stones Im sure you could find and activate it. And it would Im sure obey your command. Because Ciri I think you are the chosen one.
Your hair Triss is like fire in the candlelight. And your eyes are like Lapis Lazuli. Your lips are like coral…
Stop it Crach. Are you drunk or what? Pour me some wine. And talk.
About what?
Dont be stupid! Of how Yennefer decided to go to the Sedna-Depth.
How do you progress? Talk Yennefer.
First you will answer me one question: Who are those two women I meet every time I come to you? The ones that look at me every time with looks that are usually reserved for a piece of cat shit lying on the sofa? Who are they?
Are you after their formal legal status or fact?
The latter.
They are my wives.
I understand. Perhaps you should explain to them when the opportunity arises that the past is the past and was not written into the register.
I have. But women are women. Never mind. Tell me Yennefer. Im interested in the progress of your work.
The sorceress bit her lips. Unfortunately the progress is minimal. And time is running out.
It is running out he nodded. And always brings new sensations. I have received news from the continent that will interest you. It comes from the Corps of Vissegerd. Hopefully you know who Vissegerd is?
A general from Cintra?
A marshal. More precisely chamberlain. He leads a part of the Temerian Army consisting of Cinterein emigrants and volunteers. There are more than enough volunteers from the islands to give pass messages first-hand.
And what are they?
You came here to Skellige on the nineteenth day of August two days after the full moon. On the same day i.e. on the nineteenth the Corps of Vissegerd in the course of fighting on the River Ina took in a group of refugees among them Geralt and a troubadour that is known to him…
Dandelion?
Exactly. Vissegerd accused both of espionage placed them under arrest and wanted to put them to death but the two prisoners escaped and rushed towards the Nilfgaardians that Vissegerd had alleged they were plotting with.
Nonsense.
I think so too. But Im feeling that the witcher contrary to what you think is perhaps pursuing some cunning plan. That he is going to save Ciri from the Nilfgaardian creeps…
Ciri is not in Nilfgaard. And Geralt does not pursue any plan. Planning is not one of his strong points. Never mind. What is important is that it is the twenty-sixth day of September and I still know too little. Not enough to do something… Unless…
She trailed off looking out the window and played with the black velvet ribbon attached to the star of obsidian.
Unless?
Instead of me laughing at Geralt I could try his method.
I do not understand.
I could try to sacrifice myself. Sacrifice will pay off yes show good character… And it is in the shape of the grace of a goddess. She loves and appreciates those who sacrifice and suffer for a cause.
He frowned. I still do not understand. But I dont like what you are saying Yennefer.
I know. Me neither. But Ive already gone too far… Perhaps the lion should hear the lambs complaint…
I was afraid of that whispered Triss. Thats exactly what I was afraid of.
I mean I understood it at that time. Crach an Craites jaw muscles began to tense. Yennefer knew that someone had eavesdropped on the conversations she had through her infernal machine. Or that one of the interlocutors was treacherously telling…
Or both.
She knew it. Crach gritted his teeth. But she still continued what she started. Perhaps because she needed a decoy? Using herself as the bait? Did she pretend to know more than she did to provoke the enemy? And so she went to the Sedna-Depth…
As a challenge. As a provocation. She was taking a terrible risk Crach.
I know. She did not want any of us to run the risk… only volunteers. So she asked for two dragon boats…
I have the two ships you asked for. The Alcyone and the Tamara. And the crew. The Alcyone is captained by Guthlaf son of Sven because he asked for the honor. You must have impressed him Yennefer.
The Tamara will be captained by Asa Thjazi a captain in whom I have absolute confidence. Oh I almost forgot. My son will be on the crew of Tamara Hjalmar-SplitLip.
Your son? How old is he?
Nineteen.
You started early.
Look whos talking. Hjalmar has personal reasons to ask to be included in the crew. I could not refuse him.
Personal reasons?
Do you really not know the story?
No. Tell me.
Crach an Craite emptied his drinking horn and smiled reflecting on his memoirs.
The children of Ard Skellig he began love ice skating in the winter – they can hardly wait for the first frost to come. They are always the first to walk on the barely-frozen lakes on sheets of ice so thin that they could not support an adult. Of course the races are the best. Running and gaining momentum like theres no tomorrow from one shore to another. The boys however also organize competitions that are called Salmon Jumps. The idea is to jump over the crags that rise from the ice like sharks teeth. Just like a salmon when it jumps up the steps of a waterfall. You look for a suitably long line of stones take off  and… Ha Im jumping around like a snot-nosed brat myself…
Crach an Craite became thoughtful and smiled a little.
Naturally he continued whoever skips the longest series of rocks wins and afterwards flaunts himself like a peacock. At that time Yennefer the winner is often bestowed Yours Truly as their humble servant for a day oho. That is mainly what interested my son Hjalmar. He leapt over rocks that none of the other boys dared jump. And this led to a highly-raised nose – he challenged anyone to try to defeat him. And his challenge was accepted. By Ciri Pavettas daughter from Cintra. She was not even one of the islanders although she was allowed because she had spent more time here than in Cintra.
Even after Pavettas accident? I thought Calanthe had forbidden her to stay here?
You know about that? He shot her a quick glance. Then you know a lot Yennefer. A lot. Calanthes anger and bans lasted no longer than six months and then Ciri once again started to spend summers and winters here… and to skate. She was quick as hell but that she would compete with the other boys in Salmon Jumps? And challenge Hjalmar? Inconceivable!
She jumped guessed the sorceress.
Yes. This small Cinterein could jump like a half-devil. A real lion cub from the blood of the lion. And Hjalmar in order to not be made a mockery of had to risk taking a leap over an even longer series of rocks. He risked it. He broke his leg his arm four ribs and smashed his face. The scar will remain with him until death. Hjalmar-SplitLip! And his famous fiancée. Hehe!
Fiancée?
You didnt know that either? How can you know so much about some things and nothing at all about others? She came to visit him as he lay recovering from the famous leap. She read to him talked with him held hands with him… And if someone entered the room they both turned as red as radishes. Well finally Hjalmar told me that they had gotten engaged. I nearly had a stroke. I told the brat Id arrange an engagement for him but with a bullwhip! And I was a bit worried because Id noticed that the lion cub had hot blood. Even when everything went smoothly she was a daredevil not to mention a little crazy… Fortunately Hjalmar was stuck in there for a while so they couldnt run off and do anything stupid…
How old were they then?
He was fifteen; she nearly twelve.
Your fears might have been exaggerated a little.
Perhaps. But Calanthe who I had to tell all of it to did not take the matter lightly. I know she had wedding plans for Ciri to join her with young Tancred Thyssen of Kovir or perhaps to the Redanian prince Radovid I dont know exactly. But rumors can hurt marriage plans even rumors about innocent kissing or semi-innocent kissing… Calanthe immediately brought Ciri back to Cintra. The girl bucked and howled snot and water but to no avail. The Lioness of Cintra put her foot down. For the following two days Hjalmar lay with his face to the wall and would answer no one. Once he was healthy again he tried to steal a skiff and sail off to Cintra alone. He had to be calmed down somewhat by my belt. But then…
Crach an Craite stopped to think.
Then came the summer and then autumn and soon enough the power of Nilfgaard rolled forth against Cintra over the Marnadal-Stairs over the south wall. Hjalmar found a different opportunity to become a man. He boldly defied the blacks at Marnadal then in Cintra and then in Sodden. Even later when the dragon boats sailed to the Nilfgaardian coast Hjalmar had a sword in his hand retaliating for his almost-fiancée who he thought to be dead at the time. I did not think so since the phenomena I told you of earlier had not occurred… Well now that Hjalmar has learned of a possible rescue expedition he has volunteered.
Thank you for the story Crach. I feel rejuvenated after listening to it. It made me… forget my worries.
When will you set out Yennefer?
In the coming days. Possibly even tomorrow. I have one last telecommunication I need to conduct.
Crach an Craites eyes were like a hawks. They drilled deep inside her…
By chance do you happen to know Triss Merigold who Yennefer conducted her last call with before she took her infernal machine apart? On the night of the twenty-seventh to the twenty-eighth of August? With whom? And about what?
Triss shut her eyelashes to hide from his eyes.
The brilliant beam of light broken by the diamond flashed on the surface of the mirror. Yennefer stretched out both hands and began chanting a spell. The blindingly bright light reflected and concentrated into a fog. Soon a picture began to emerge. The image of a room whose walls were covered with colorful tapestries.
A movement at the window. And a troubled voice. Who? Whos there?
Im here Triss.
Yennefer! That you? Gods! How did… Where are you?
It does not matter where I am. Do not block the image because the picture varies. And take away that candle its blinding.
Right. Of course.
Although it was late at night Triss Merigold was wearing neither lingerie nor her work clothes. She wore a dress for going out. As usual high-collared and closed.
Can we talk freely?
Of course.
Youre alone?
Yes.
Youre lying.
Yennefer…
You are deceiving me brat. I know your face; I know you too well. Its the same look you had when you started sleeping with Geralt behind my back. Back then you put on the same sheepish innocent mask that I see on your face now. And it means the same thing now that it meant back then!
Triss was red. Philippa Eilhart appeared in the window next to her dressed in a dark blue mens jerkin. Bravo she said. As usual quick. As usual perceptive. As usual hard to grasp and understand. I am glad to see you in health Yennefer. I am happy that your crazy teleportation from Montecalvo did not end in tragedy.
Lets assume that you really are happy. Yennefer pouted. Although that is a very bold assumption. But never mind that who betrayed me?
Philippa shrugged her shoulders. Does it matter? For four days now youve been in contact with traitors. To such as them venality and treachery are second nature. And to those that you have blackmailed to betrayal. One of them has betrayed you. The normal course of events. Dont tell me you didnt expect it.
Of course I expected it snapped Yennefer. The best proof of that is that Ive contacted you. I did not have to.
You did not have to. This means that you have an agenda.
Bravo. As usual quick. As usual perceptive. I have contacted you to assure you that the secret of your Lodge is safe with me. I will not tell on you.
Philippa stared at her from under lowered eyelids. If you believe she said finally that youve won peace time or security with this declaration then youve miscalculated. Make no mistake about it Yennefer. When you fled from Montecalvo you made your decision. You chose to stand on a different side of the barricade. If you are not with the Lodge you are against the Lodge. Now youre trying to forestall us from finding Ciri and the motives that guide you are opposed to ours. You act against us. You do not want to allow us to use Ciri for our political purposes. You should know that we will also do everything in our power to make sure that you cannot use the girl for your sentimental purposes.
So its war?
Competition. Philippa smiled toxically. Competition only Yennefer.
Decent and honorable?
You must be joking.
Obviously. Though on at least one specific issue I would like to have an honest and genuine conversation. And incidentally it involves a favor to me.
Speak.
Over the next few days maybe even tomorrow events will occur whose consequences I cannot foresee. It may happen that our competition and rivalry suddenly has no meaning. For the simple reason that one of the competitors will not be there anymore.
Philippa Eilhart narrowed her blue-shaded eyes. I understand.
Ensure that I posthumously gain back my reputation and good name. I will no longer be held for a traitor or an accomplice of Vilgefortz. I ask this of the Lodge. I ask this of you personally.
Philippa was silent for a moment.
I deny your request she said finally. Im sorry but your exoneration is not in the interest of the Lodge. If you die you die a traitor. Youll be a traitor and criminal to Ciri because then it will be easier to manipulate the girl.
Before you do something that could be fatal Triss said suddenly leave something behind for us…
A will?
Something that allows us to… continue. To find Ciri. Because we are primarily concerned for her health! For her life! Yennefer Dijkstra has found some traces of… some traces of certain activities have been found. If Vilgefortz does have Ciri then the girl faces a horrible death.
Be quiet Triss Philippa Eilhart hissed sharply. We are not trading or bargaining.
I will leave you the information Yennefer said slowly. Ill leave you the information on what Ive found and what I plan. Ill leave a trail you can follow to her. But not in vain. If you will not facilitate my exoneration in the eyes of the world then to hell with you and with the world. But at least grant me exoneration in the eyes of the witcher.
No Philippa denied the request almost instantly. That is also not in the interest of the Lodge. You will also remain a traitor and a mercenary sorceress to your witcher. It is not in the interest of the Lodge for him to furiously attempt to avenge you. If he despises you he will not attempt to take revenge. By the way hes probably already dead or will die any day now.
The information Yennefer said dully for his life. Save him Philippa.
No Yennefer.
Because its not in the interest of the Lodge. A purple fire kindled in the sorceress eyes. Did you hear that Triss? There you have your Lodge. You see their true colors their true interests. And what do you think of them? You were a mentor to the girl almost – as you put it – a big sister. And Geralt…
Do not attack Triss relationships Yennefer. Philippa retaliated with her own fire in her eyes. We will find and rescue the girl without your help. And if you succeed thats fine a thousand thanks because you will have saved us the trouble. You tear the girl out of the hands of Vilgefortz and we will be happy. And Geralt? Who cares about Geralt?
Did you hear that Triss?
Forgive me said Triss Merigold dully. Forgive me Yennefer.
Oh no Triss. Never.
Triss stared at the ground. Crach an Craites eyes were like a hawks.
The day after this last mysterious communication the Earl of the Skellige Islands said slowly of which you Triss Merigold know nothing about of course Yennefer left the island setting a course for the Sedna-Depth. When I asked her why she was going there she looked into my eyes and replied that she had to check whether the natural disasters there were any different from the unnatural. She travelled with two dragon boats the Tamara and the Alcyone and with a crew composed entirely of volunteers. This was the twenty-eighth of August two weeks ago. I have not seen her since.
When did you hear…
Five days later he interrupted sharply. Three days after the September moon.
Captain Asa Thjazi who sat in front of the Earl was restless. He licked his lips and slid back and forth on the bench fingers kneaded so that his knuckles cracked. The red sun which had finally emerged from the low-hanging clouds in the sky slowly started to sink behind Spikeroog. Speak Asa Crach an Craite ordered.
Asa Thjazi coughed violently. We travelled fast he reported the wind was favorable and we made a good twelve knots. On the evening of the twenty-ninth we saw the lights of the Peixe de Mar lighthouse. We shot a little to the west so as to not encounter any Nilfgaardians… And at dawn on the day prior to the September moon we came to the area known as the Sedna-Depth. The sorceress cried for Guthlaf and me to…
I need volunteers Yennefer said. Only volunteers. No more than necessary to control a dragon boat for a short time. I do not know how many people this requires I am not familiar with it. But I ask for not one more man than absolutely necessary on the Alcyone. And I repeat only volunteers. What I plan is… very risky. Riskier than a sea-battle.
I understand the old seneschal nodded. And I volunteer first. I Guthlaf son of Sven ask for this honor my lady.
Yennefer looked long into his eyes. Good she said. But I am the one who is honored.
I also volunteered said Asa Thjazi. But Guthlaf would not allow it. Someone he said must stay behind to command the Tamara. Finally fifteen had volunteered. Including Hjalmar Earl.
Crach an Craite raised his eyebrows.
How many do we need Guthlaf? Repeated the sorceress. How many are essential? Please calculate this accurately.
The steward was silent for a while calculating.
We can get by with eight he said. If it is only for a short time… But we have many volunteers here so we do not need to be so…
Pick eight of these fifteen she interrupted him sharply. Do it yourself. And tell them that they are to go aboard the Alcyone. Everyone else will remain on the Tamara. Oh yes and I will pick one that remains. Hjalmar!
No lady! You cannot do this to me! I volunteered and I will stand by your side! I want to…
Shut up! You will stay on the Tamara! Thats an order! One more word and Ill have you tied to the mast!
Continue Asa.
The sorceress Guthlaf and those eight volunteers went aboard the Alcyone and went to the Depth. We stayed behind in the Tamara as ordered but the distance was not too great. However the weather which we had hitherto been favorable suddenly became something devilish. Yes devilish is the right word for it because there was an evil force at work Earl… may you careen me if I lie…
Continue.
Where the Tamara was it was quiet. Although the wind began to act a little mischievous so that clouds moved over the sky until the day was almost as dark as night. But where the Alcyone was all hell broke loose. Pure hell…
The sails of the Alcyone suddenly began to beat so violently that they could be heard from the Tamara despite the distance between the two ships. The sky was black and the clouds had clustered together. The sea which appeared totally calm near the Tamara swelled up and threw breakers over the side of the Alcyone. Suddenly someone cried out then someone else joined in and immediately after everyone was shouting.
Under a black cloud with a tapering cone the Alcyone danced on the waves like a cork – turning whirling jumping and diving quickly into the waves with its bow or sometimes its stern. There were moments when the dragon boat was almost completely hidden from sight. There were moments when the only thing that could be seen was the striped sail.
Its magic! someone shouted behind Asas back. Its the devils magic!
The vortex left the Alcyone spinning faster and faster. The shields on the dragon boats sidewalls were torn off by the centrifugal force and whizzed through the air like discuses shooting to the left and right of the broken rudder.
Reef the sails cried Asa Thjazi. Man the helm! Were moving! We need to help!
But it was too late.
The black sky above the Alcyone suddenly exploded with jagged lightning clasping the ship like the tentacles of a jellyfish. The fantastic shapes of the aggregated clouds twisted into a monstrous funnel. The dragon boat spun around with uncanny speed. The mast broke like a matchstick and the torn sails hovered over the breakers like a giant albatross.
Row men!
He could barely hear his own roar over the roar of the elements but they all heard the cry of the people on the Alcyone. It was such an eerie scream that it made their hair stand on end. Them… ancient mariners bloody zealots and sailors who had seen and heard so much.
They let go of the oars aware of their powerlessness. They were stunned they even stopped shouting.
Still turning the Alcyone rose slowly over the waves. It rose higher and higher. They saw the keel dripping water covered with barnacles and seaweed. Then they saw a black shape a silhouette falling into the waves. Then another. And then a third.
Theyre jumping cried Asa Thjazi. Row men do not fade! Row like theres no tomorrow! We ride to the rescue!
The Alcyone was already a hundred yards above the oceans surface where the water was bubbling as if it were boiling. She still whirled around – a huge dripping spindle embraced by fiery flashes of forked lightening and pulled by an invisible force into the aggregated clouds.
Suddenly a deafening explosion ripped the air. Although she was driven by fifteen pairs of oars the Tamara suddenly jumped up and was flung backwards like a battering ram. Asa Thjazi felt the deck shift beneath his feet. He fell hitting his temple on the railing.
He could not even stand up he had to be lifted. He was stunned. He turned and shook his head stammering incoherently. He heard the shouts of the crew from afar. He stumbled to the side swaying like a drunk and clutched the railing.
The wind had died down and the waves had calmed. But the sky was still full of aggregated black clouds.
There was no trace of the Alcyone to be seen.
There was no trace to be seen Earl. Well bits of the rigging some scraps… Nothing more.
Asa Thjazi broke off the story and watched the sun as it sank behind the wooded peaks of Spikeroog. Crach an Craite lost in thought did not urge him on.
You never know Asa Thjazi continued at last how many were able to jump off the Alcyone before that vicious cloud passed. But no matter how many jumped no one survived. And although we spared both time and effort we were only able to recover two bodies. Two bodies that floated in the water. Only two.
The sorceress the Earl said in a changed voice was not among them?
No.
Crach an Craite was silent for a long time. The sun disappeared behind Spikeroog.
Old Guthlaf son of Sven is gone Asa Thjazi continued. Most likely the crabs at the bottom of Sedna-Depth have already gnawed him to the last bone… The sorceress disappeared altogether… Earl people have started to talk… That it was all their fault. And that the punishment fit the crime…
Fools talk!
She disappeared muttered Asa in the Sedna-Depth. At the same place as Pavetta and Duny… What a coincidence…
That is no coincidence said Crach an Craite firmly. Neither this time nor the time before were coincidences.
It is essential that the unfortunate suffer. His pain and humiliation resulting from the laws of nature which requires suffering as well from him who his suffering is caused by. This truth must override any remorse in the soul of a tyrant or villain. He does not have to restrain he must commit boldly all the acts that are born of his imagination because it is the voice of nature that suggests it to him.
It is the secret inspiration of nature that leads us to evil then evil is apparently naturally essential.
Donatien Alphonse Francois de Sade
CHAPTER TEN
The sound of a door creaking open and then closing woke the youngest of the Scarra sisters from slumber. The eldest of the sisters sat at the table and was busy scraping porridge from the bottom of a tin bowl.
How did it go in court Kenna?
Joanna Selbourne called Kenna said nothing. She sat on the bed elbows on knees and her forehead in her hands.
The young Scarra yawned and belched loudly. On the opposite bed Kohout vaguely muttered something and turned away. He was angry at Kenna with the sisters and the whole world.
In ordinary prisons prisoners were still traditionally divided by gender. The military fortresses were different. The Emperor Fergus var Emreis in a decree confirming the equal rights of women in the imperial army ordered that if emancipated for emancipation equality should be the same everywhere and in every respect without exception or special privileges for any of the sexes. Since that time in the fortresses and citadels prisoners served their sentences in coeducational cells.
So what? the elder Scarra reiterated her earlier question. Will they release you?
Justice said Kenna bitterly with her head still in her hands. Ill be lucky if Im not hanged. Damn! I testified the whole truth and hid nothing; well almost nothing. And that bastard started making me look insane he announced that I was an unreliable person and a criminal element and in the end accused me of involvement in the conspiracy which aimed to overthrow…
Overthrow said the older Scarra pretending to understand her shook her head. If it is about the overthrow youre fucked Kenna.
As if I didnt know.
Scarra the Younger stretched and yawned again widely and loudly like a leopard and jumped off the top bunk energetically kicked a stool obstructing her way and spat on the floor beside the stool. Kohout grunted but did not dare more.
Kohout was deadly angry with Kenna. But he was afraid of the sisters.
When Kenna was three days ago assigned to this cell it quickly became apparent that Kohout had his own opinions about the emancipation and equality of women. In the middle of the night he threw a blanket over the top of Kennas body with the intention of using the lower part which surely would have succeeded had it not been for the fact that he had found a psionic. Kenna got into his brain in such a way that Kohout howled like a werewolf and crawled around the cell like he had been bitten by a tarantula. Kenna out of pure revenge telepathically forced him to get on all fours and hit his head on the metal door of the cell. When alarmed by the terrible noise the guards opened the door and gave Kohout a beating receiving five blows from a club and as many kicks. In summary Kohout did not get the night of pleasure he was expecting. And he became angry with Kenna. He did not even dare think of revenge because the next day they were put in a cell with the Scarra sisters. So the fair sex was the majority and to top it off it soon became clear that the view of the sisters on gender were close to Kohouts except the exact opposite when it came to the roles assigned to genders. Scarra the Younger looked with a predatory look into his eyes and uttered clear unmistakable comments; the older sister just laughed and rubbed her hands together happily. The result was that Kohout slept with a wooden stool which if necessary he would use to defend his honor. In the case of an actual threat his chances were slim – the two sisters had served in the regular army and were veterans of many battles. They would not surrender to a stool if they wanted to rape and violate him even if the man was armed with an axe. Kenna was certain that the sisters were only joking. Well almost certain.
The Scarra sisters were in jail for having beaten an officer. While in Kohouts case he was in pending an investigation related to a scam for stealing the spoils of war that were already famous and reaching higher circles.
Youre fucked Kenna the older Scarra repeated. Youre stuck in deep shit. Or rather you have been dipped. Because you dont realize this is a political game!
Bah!
Scarra looked at her not really knowing how to read the monosyllabic statement. Kenna looked away.
Im not going to tell you that I was silent before the judges she thought. That I knew what game I was getting entangled in. Neither of when or how I learned.
You bit off more than you could swallow the significantly younger Scarra said wisely who according to Kenna had no idea what was going on here.
What happened with the princess of Cintra? the older Scarra did not give up. You caught her right?
Caught. If you can say that… Whats the date today?
Twenty-second of September. Tomorrow is the equinox.
Ha. What a coincidence. Tomorrow it will be exactly one year since those events… a year…
Kenna lay on the bed hands clasped behind her neck. The sisters were silent hoping that this was an introduction to a story.
Not at all sisters Kenna thought looking at the filth written and drawn on the boards of the bunk above her. There will be no story. And not because Kohout would sell me out to the fucking cops or another witness for the crown. I just do not want to talk about it. I dont want to remember.
What happened a year ago… after Bonhart escaped us in Claremont.
We arrived there two days too late she remembered and the trail had already cooled. Nobody knew where the bounty hunter had gone. No one except the merchant Houvenaghel I mean. But Houvenaghel would not talk to us or Skellen and would not even let us enter his house and sent a servant that told us he did not have time to grant an audience. The Owl sulked and bridled but what could I do? It was Ebbing and I had no jurisdiction. And otherwise – on our own – we could not go after Houvenaghel because he had a private army in Claremont and we could not start a war…
Boreas Mun tracked Dacre Silifant and Ola Harsheim attempted to bribe Til Echrade tried elven magic and I perceived thoughts and listened but this did not amount to much. We learned that Bonhart had left town by the south gate. And that before he left…
In the marketplace near the south gate there was a small shrine. Before leaving Claremont Bonhart had Falka whipped in front of the shrine. In front of everyone including the eyes of the priests of the shrine. He shouted that he would show her who was her lord and master. That he could whip her where he wanted and if he wanted he could beat her to death because no one would take part in it no one would help her neither men nor gods.
Scarra the Younger looked out the window clinging to the bars. The older ate porridge from her bowl. Kohout retrieved his stool lay down and covered himself with a blanket.
They heard the bell from the guardhouse and the cries from the sentries on the walls…
Kenna turned to face the wall.
A few days later we met she thought. Me and Bonhart. Face to face. I looked into his inhuman fish eyes that were only thinking about one thing – how to beat this girl. And I took one look at his thoughts… Just for a moment. And it was like sticking my head into an open grave…
This happened on the equinox.
And on the eve of the twenty-second of September I realized that between us was something invisible.
Stefan Skellen the Imperial Coroner listened without interrupting. But Kenna saw how his face changed.
Repeat Selbourne he drawled. Repeat I do not believe my ears.
Careful Mister Coroner she murmured. Pretend anger… As if I came up with a request and you are rejecting it. On the surface that is. I am not mistaken Im sure. For at least the last two days circling around us is an invisible spy.
The Owl had to admit that he was understanding and immediately got his bearings.
No Selbourne I refuse he said aloud but avoided exaggerated acting with both his tone and gestures. Discipline applies to all. There are no exceptions. I do not agree!
Hear me out Mister Coroner said Kenna. She had no such acting talent like the Owl but in this case the uncertainty and self-consciousness of the applicant worked quite reliably. At least hear me out…
Speak Selbourne! But short and concise!
They have been spying on us for two days she murmured pretending to humbly explain her reasons. From Claremont. It has secretly been following us and comes into our camp and moves between people spying.
Listen fucking spy Skellen did not have to fake the anger or severity in his voice which trembled with rage. How did you find out?
When you were giving orders to Mister Silifant yesterday night before the inn a cat as she slept on a bench suddenly hissed bristled her coat and laid her ears flat. I did not suspect because there was no one in there… Then I caught something – A strange thought someone elses will. When you think the thoughts are familiar ordinary but this strange thought Mister Coroner was as if someone had shouted loudly… I began to listen attentively and found him.
Can you always feel him?
Not always. It has some magical protection. I can only feel it at close range and even then not every time. Therefore we must keep up appearances since I dont know if he is hiding nearby.
Just do not startle him growled the Owl. Just do not startle him. I want him alive Selbourne. What do you suggest?
We are going to make pancakes.
Pancakes?
Lower your voice Mister Coroner.
But… Ah never mind. Agreed. I leave you with a free hand.
Tomorrow we will arrange for us to stay overnight at a village. Ill take care of the others. And now mock rebuke me before I go.
I will not rebuke you he winked conspiratorially at her but then his face became the expression of a strict commander. I am satisfied with you Lady Selbourne.
He said Lady. Lady Selbourne. Like an officer. He winked again.
No! he said waving his hand playing his role brilliantly. Request rejected! Be gone!
As you command Mister Coroner.
The next day late in the afternoon Skellen ordered them to stop in a village on the River Lete. The village was rich surrounded by a palisade; it was entered by a heavy door revolving on an axis. The village was called Unicorn. And it took the name from a small stone chapel where there was a straw doll representing a unicorn.
How we laughed at the little god of straw remembered Kenna. And the mayor with a serious expression he said the holy Unicorn that had protected the town years ago had been made of gold then silver then copper then there were some versions of bone and wood. But all had been stolen and looted. Only since the Unicorn had been made of straw had it been left alone.
We stayed in the village for a night. As agreed Skellen housed himself in one of the rustic cottages. And in less than an hour we made the invisible spy a pancake. In the classic textbook way.
Please approach the Owl ordered. Please come closer and take a look at this document… wait! Is everyone here? I dont want to have to explain the whole thing twice.
Ola Harsheim who was drinking a cup of cream wiped away a milk moustache dropped his glass looked around and counted.
Dacre Silifant Bert Brigden Neratin Ceka Til Echrade Joanna Selbourne… No Duffi.
Call him.
Kriel! Duffi Kriel! To the commander for a briefing! For important orders! Run!
Duffi Kriel ran breathlessly into the parlor.
Were all here Mister Coroner said Ola Harsheim.
Open the window the garlic in here stinks so much you cant breathe. And you can also open the door let in a draft.
Brigden obediently opened the door and Kenna was again convinced that the Owl was a brilliant actor.
Come closer. I have received from the Emperor a top secret and extremely important document. Be careful…
Now! Kenna shouted sending a strong directional pulse which had the equivalent effect on the senses as being struck by lightning.
Ola Harsheim and Dacre Silifant grabbed buckets and threw cream at the same time at the place where Kenna indicated. Til Echrade quickly threw a bag of flour that was hidden under the table. On the floor of the room materialized a creamy floury form initially formless. But Bert Brigden watched. Assessing without error where the head of the pancake might be and hit it with a heavy cast-iron skillet.
Everyone rushed to the cream and flour spy took from his head an invisibility cap and grabbed him by the arms and legs. They took him to the table where they tied the prisoner to the legs of the table. They took off his boots and socks and stuffed one sock into his mouth to stop him screaming.
To complete their work Kriel Duffi struck him with delight with a kick to the ribs of the prisoner and the rest watched with satisfaction as the spys eyes popped from their sockets.
Good work said the Owl who during the short time had not moved from his spot and stood with his hands crossed on his chest. Bravo. I congratulate you. Especially you Lady Joanna.
Damn thought Kenna if this continues I might become an officer.
Mister Brigden Stefan Skellen said in a cold voice standing next to the prisoners outstretched feet that were tied to the table please put an iron in the fire. Mister Echrade please take a look around outside the room for small children.
He bent down and looked into the prisoners eyes.
It has been a long time since you showed yourself Rience he said. I had begun to think that some misfortune had befallen you.
The bell announcing the changing of the guard rang. The Scarra sisters snored melodiously. Kohout muttered in his sleep clutching his stool.
He tried to look brave Kenna recalled Rience pretended to have to fear. The Sorcerer Rience looking like a pancake tied to the legs of a table with his feet bare. He tried to look brave. Although he did not fool anyone and least of all me. The Owl had warned me that he was a sorcerer so I muddled his thoughts so that he could not cast spells or try and magically get help. And I read them. He tried to defend them but when he smelled the smoke from the charcoal fire that was heating the iron his magical defenses and locks opened up like an old pair of trousers and I read to my liking. His thoughts did not differ at all from those others who had been in similar situations.
Delirious thoughts trembling with fear and despair. Cold slimy wet and smelly thoughts. Like the interior of a corpse.
Well Skellen you win you caught me. Congratulations. I bow to the technical expertise and professionalism. I envy your well-trained people. And now please free me from this uncomfortable position.
The Owl approached a chair and sat on it backwards resting his chin on his clasped hands on the back of the chair. He looked at the prisoner from above. And was silent.
Order them to release me Skellen Rience repeated. And then ask your subordinates to leave. What I have to say is only for your ears.
Mister Brigden the Owl said without turning his head. What color is the iron?
You will still have to wait a bit Mister Coroner.
Lady Selbourne?
He is hard to read now Kenna shrugged. He is too afraid. Fear is suppressing all other thoughts. Nevertheless he is still trying to hide a few thoughts behind magic barriers. But it will not be a problem I can…
No need. Let us use the traditional method – red-hot iron.
Fuck! howled the spy. Skellen! Youre not going…
The Owl leaned forward his face changing slightly.
Firstly Lord Skellen he said. Secondly yes I am. Im going to tickle you with a hot poker. Ill do it with inexpressible pleasure. And Ill treat it as an expression of historical justice. I bet you do not understand.
Rience remained silent so Skellen continued.
You know Rience I counselled Vattier de Rideaux to burn your heels even then seven years ago when you crawled up to the imperial intelligence like a dog begging for the privilege to be a double agent. I gave him the same advice four years ago when you climbed in Emhyrs ass and started meditating contact with Vilgefortz. And when you received the task of hunting the Cintran you moved from an ordinary little traitor to a resident. I bet Vattier that if we gave you a taste of red-hot iron wed find out who you served… No that was poorly expressed. Wed find out all who serve and all those who betray. Then I told him Vattier that hed be amazed as to how much the two lists match. But Vattier de Rideaux ignored me. And now surely he regrets it. But nothing is lost. Im going to roast you a bit to find out what you know and then I will put you at the disposal of Vattier. And he is going to remove your skin slowly in small fragments.
The Owl took a handkerchief and a bottle of perfume from his pocket. He liberally sprinkled the handkerchief and held it to his nose. The perfume smelled pleasantly of musk yet Kenna wanted to vomit.
The iron Mister Brigden.
I followed you on Vilgefortz command! Rience cried. It is the girl! I was following your squad; I was hoping to stall you before you got to this bounty hunter! I was to try and bargain with him for the girl! From him not from you! Because you want to kill her and Vilgefortz needs her alive! What more do you want to know? Ill tell! Ill tell you everything!
Well well! The Owl cried. Slow down! Both noise and lots of information can give one a headache. Can you imagine gentlemen what will happen when we roast him? We will go deaf in the end!
Kriel and Silifant laughed out loud but Kenna Neratin and Ceka did not join them. Bert Brigden also maintained his seriousness as he pulled the hot poker from the glowing coals and stared at it intently. The iron rod was so hot it seemed almost translucent – like liquid fire filling a glass tube.
Rience saw it and screamed.
I know how to find the bounty hunter and the Cintran! I know how! Ill tell you!
I do not doubt it.
Kenna who was still trying to read his thoughts frowned upon receiving a wave of rage and impotent despair. In Riences brain again something broke another barrier. He was so afraid that he was going to say something Kenna thought which he planned to keep until the end as a trump card an ace up his sleeve that could have defeated everyone elses cards in a final and decisive suit to the highest bidder. Now pure and simple fear of pain will put that card on the table.
Suddenly something was poured into her head; she felt heat in her temples then a sudden cold.
And she knew. She had found Riences hidden thoughts.
By the gods she thought what a mess Ive gotten…
Ill talk! screamed the sorcerer flushing and fixing his bulging eyes on the coroner. Ill tell you something really important Skellen! Vattier de Rideaux…
Kenna suddenly heard another strange thought. She saw Neratin Ceka hand on his dagger move towards the door.
The pounding of boots. Boreas Mun entered the council room.
Mister Coroner! Hurry Mister Coroner! Youll never believe who has arrived…
Skellen with a gesture stopped Brigden who was moving the iron towards the heels of the spy.
You ought to play the lottery Rience he said looking out the window. I have never seen anyone with as much luck as you.
Through the window they could see people in a group and in the center of the group a couple on horseback. Kenna knew immediately who they were. She knew who the giant man with the pale fish eyes on the tall bay was. And who the gray-haired girl mounted on a beautiful black mare was. With her hands tied and a chain around her neck. With dark bruises on her swollen cheek.
Vysogota returned to his hut in a foul mood depressed silent and angry even. The cause was the talk of a villager who had come by a canoe to collect his skins. This may be the last time before spring said the villager. The weather gets worse from day to day the rain and the wind have made one afraid to come by boat. In the morning there is ice in the puddles; I think soon we are going to see snow. The river will freeze and I will have to hide the boat and pull a sled. But here in the Pereplut you cannot even get to in a sled due to all the bogs.
The villager was right. In the evening the sky became overcast and it started to pour heavy snowflakes. Gusty winds from the east whipped the cattails and waves rose in the usually calm river. The penetrating cold crawled into his old bones.
The day after tomorrow Vysogota thought is the festival of Saovine. According to the Elvish calendar within three days will be a new year. According to the calendar of humans we will have to wait two more moths for the New Year.
Kelpie the black mare of Ciris was kicking and snorting in the goat pen.
When he entered the cottage he found Ciri searching the trunks. He let her do it even encouraged her. First it was a completely new thing after riding Kelpie and reading books. Second in the trunks he had quite a bit of his daughters stuff and she needed warmer clothes. Several changes of clothes because it had been cold and damp for days and the washed clothes hadnt dried.
Ciri chose tried on rejected and took off. Vysogota sat at the table. He ate two boiled potatoes and chicken wings. He remained silent.
Good craftsmanship she showed him an item that he had not seen for years and had forgotten he had. Did this belong to your daughter? Did she like to skate?
She loved it. She looked forward to winter.
Can I take them?
Take what you want he shrugged his shoulders. I have no use for them. If they are useful and the shoe fits… But is this preparing your luggage Ciri? Are you preparing to go?
Yes Vysogota she said after a moment of silence. Ive decided. Because you know… there is no time to lose.
Your dreams?
Yes she admitted after a while. Ive seen bad things in my dreams. Im not sure if it has already taken place or whether this is just the future. I dont know if I can prevent it… but I have to go. See I at one point complained that my friends had not come to my aid. I was left to the mercy of fate… And now I think that maybe they need my help. I have to go.
Winter is coming.
That is why I have to go. If I stay Ill be stuck until spring… Until spring Ill be worrying with inactivity and uncertainty and haunted by nightmares. I have to go I have to go now to try and find the Tower of the Swallow. The teleporter. You yourself have estimated that going up the river will be a fifteen day journey. I could get there before Novembers full moon…
You cannot leave your sanctuary now he murmured with effort. Not now. Your pursuers are close… Very close. You cannot…
She threw down a shirt and rose like she was driven by a spring.
You have heard something she strongly stated the fact. From the villager who took the skins. Tell me.
Ciri…
Tell me please!
He told her. He later regretted it.
They think the devil sent them honorable Mister Hermit murmured the peasant stopping for a moment counting the skins. The devil I guess. Since the Equinox they have roamed the woods looking for a girl. They then raided the villages shouting threatening scaring but then moved on. Well we could endure it. Now there are new innovations. They have left a patrol in the villages – three to four bandits who we must look after. Perhaps they will remain all winter. They said they will wait for the girl they seek to come out of hiding at one of the villages. So she can be trapped.
And they are also in your village?
The villager scowled and gritted his teeth.
There are none in our village we were lucky. But half a day away from us in Dun Dare there sits four. They hang about in the tavern. They are scoundrels Mister Hermit scoundrels and downright disgusting. They started badgering the young women from the village and when the men stood up to them Mister Hermit they were slain without mercy…
They killed people from the village?
Two. The Mayor and one other. Tell me Mister Hermit does no punishment come to such bastards? Is there no law? A councilor who came to us from Dun Dare with his wife and daughter said he was going out into the world and he would find a witcher… They clean up all manner of villainy. He would invite a witcher to Dun Dare to take care of these scoundrels…
Witchers kill monsters not people.
They are villains good Mister Hermit; they are not people only rogues sent from hell. A witcher is needed a witcher… Well it is time for me to be on my way Mister Hermit… Uh it is getting cold! Soon I will have to hide the boat and pull a sled… And for the bastards in Dun Dare Mister Hermit a witcher is needed.
Hes right Ciri said through clenched teeth. Hes right. It takes a witcher… Or a witcheress. Four right? In Dun Dare right? And where is this Dun Dare? Upriver? Can I get there through the swamp?
By the gods Ciri Vysogota was frightened. You cannot be serious…
Do not swear by the gods if you do not believe in them. And I know that you dont believe.
Leave aside my beliefs. Ciri what crazy ideas are hatching in your head? How can you even…
Now it is your turn to leave aside my beliefs Vysogota. I know what my duty is. Im a witcher!
You are young and erratic snapped the old man. You are a child who has suffered a severe trauma. A hurt child neurotic and close to a nervous breakdown. And above all you are sick with your desire for revenge! Do you not understand?
I understand it better than you! she cried. You have no idea what I went through! You have no idea of revenge because you have never really been hurt!
She ran from the hut. An icy wind burst through the open doors. After a moment he heard neighing and the clatter of hooves.
Angry he hit the plate on the table. Let her go he thought furiously ride off some of her rage. He was not afraid for her she often rode through the swamp and she had learned the safe path between the marshes. And if by chance she got lost she could loosen the reins Kelpie knew the way home to the goat pen.
After some time when dusk fell he went out and hung a lantern on a pole. He stood by the hedge straining to hear the clatter of hooves or the splashing of water. However the wind through the reeds drowned out all other noise. The lantern stirred drunkenly on the pole for a moment and then went out.
At that moment he heard it. From a distance. Not in the direction that Ciri had gone but from the opposite direction. From the swamp.
A savage inhuman prolonged wailing cry. A howl. And a moment of silence. And once again.
A Beannshie.
An elven spirit. A messenger of death.
Vysogota shook with cold and fear. He went back quickly into the hut muttering and mumbling under his breath so as not to hear because it should not be heard.
Before he could relight the lantern Kelpie emerged from the fog.
Lets go into the hut Ciri said softly. And do not go out. Tonight will be an awful night.
During dinner they quarreled again.
It seems you know a lot about the problems of good and evil!
Because I know! And not just from books from a college!
No of course. You know all from personal experience. From practice. You have accumulated a wealth of experiences in your long sixteen-year life.
I have gathered much.
Congratulations. Fellow colleague.
You mock me she said taking a deep breath. Yet you have no idea how bad it is in the world you senile scientists theorists with your books with centuries of experience in reading moral treatises so diligent that you havent even had time to look out the window and see what it looks like in the real world. You philosophers artificially supporting artificial philosophies to collect your salary at the university. A dog with a lame leg would not pay you for the ugly truth about the world and you came up with ethics and morals – a nice optimistic learning. But fraudulent and deceptive!
Nothing is more fraudulent and deceptive brat than a judgment hasty and unbalanced!
You have not found a cure for evil! And I a witcher brat I found it! A reliable cure!
He did not answer but his face betrayed his opinion because Ciri abruptly jumped up from the table.
Do you think that I am talking nonsense? That I am speaking just to speak?
I think he said quietly that you speak in anger. I think that you are planning revenge in anger. Therefore I urge you to calm down.
I am calm! And revenge? Explain to me why not? Why should I give up revenge? On behalf of what? Moral principles? And what of the higher order of things in which evil deeds are punished? For you a philosopher and ethicist an act of revenge is bad disgraceful unethical and illegal. But I ask: where is the punishment for evil? Who has it and grants access? The Gods in which you do not believe? The great demiurge-creator which you decided to replace the gods with? Or maybe the law? Maybe with Nilfgaardian justice with judges and imperial prefects? Naïve old man!
So an eye for an eye tooth for a tooth blood for blood. And for that blood more blood a sea of blood. Do you want the world to drown in blood? You naïve and wounded girl. So you can fight against evil witcher?
Yes. Exactly so! Because I know what evil is afraid of. Not your ethics Vysogota not your preaching or moral treaties on the life of dignity. Evil is afraid of pain mutilation suffering and at the end of the day death! The dog howls when it is badly wounded! Writhing on the ground and growls watching the blood flow from its veins and arteries; seeing the bone that sticks out from a stump; watching its guts escape its open belly; feeling the cold as death is about to take them. Then and only then will evil begin to beg Have mercy! I regret my sins! Ill be good I swear! Just save me do not let me waste away! Yes hermit. That is the way to fight evil! When evil wants to harm you inflict pain – anticipate them its best if evil does not expect it. But if you fail to prevent evil if you have been hurt by evil then avenge him! It is best when they have already forgotten when they feel safe. Then pay them in double. In triple. An eye for an eye? No! Both eyes for an eye! A tooth for a tooth? No! All their teeth for a tooth! Repay evil! Make it wail in pain howling until their eyes pop from their sockets. And then you can look under your feet and boldly declare that what is there cannot endanger anyone cannot hurt anyone. How can someone be a danger when they have no eyes? How can someone hurt when they have no hands? They can only wait until they bleed to death.
And you said the hermit stand with a sword in your hand and look at the growing puddle of blood. And you have the arrogance to think that youve solved the age-old dilemma answered the eternal question of philosophers. Do you think the nature of Evil has changed?
Sure she said firmly. Because what lies on the ground and drowns in blood thats not evil. Maybe it is not good but it is no longer evil!
Scholars say that nature abhors a vacuum said Vysogota. What lies on the ground drowning in blood which you fell with your sword isnt evil. So what is it? Have you thought about that?
No. I am a witcher. When I was taught I swore to fight evil. Always. And without thinking.
Because when you start to think she added in a low voice the killing ceases to make sense. And that cannot be allowed.
He shook his head but she waved and prevented him from arguing.
It is time to finish my story Vysogota. I have told you for over three nights from the equinox to Saovine. And yet I have not told you everything. Before I go you should learn what happened in the village named Unicorn…
She cried as she was pulled from the saddle. The hip in which she had been kicked yesterday hurt. He jerked on her chain collar and dragged her to a building.
At the cottage door stood a few armed men. And one woman.
Bonhart said one of the men slim and dark; in his hand was a brass-spiked whip. Ill have to admit that you can surprise people.
Hello Skellen.
The man named Skellen approached her captor as he looked straight into her eyes. She shivered under his gaze.
So? he turned to look at Bonhart. Will you be explaining it all at once or little by little?
I do not like to explain anything in the courtyard where flies can crawl into the mouth. Are you going to invite me in?
Come in.
Bonhart jerked the chain collar.
In the house was another man disheveled and pale perhaps a chef because he was busy cleaning his clothes that were covered in flour and cream. Seeing Ciri his eyes sparkled. He approached.
He was not a chef.
She recognized him; she remembered those terrible eyes and the burn on his face. It was he who along with the Squirrels had been pursuing her in Thanedd. She had escaped from him by jumping out of a window and he had ordered the elves to go after her. What did the elf call him? Rens?
Well well! he said with a venomous voice while he planted his hand hard and painfully into her chest. Lady Ciri! We have not seen each other since Thanedd. Ive been looking for you for a long long time. And now I have finally found you!
I dont know who you are sir Bonhart said coldly but what you have found is mine; keep your hands off of her if you value your fingers.
My name is Rience the wizards eyes shone in an unpleasant manner. Do yourself a favor and remember it sir bounty hunter. And who I am you will see soon. Youll also see who the girl belongs to. But lets not get ahead of events. For now I just want to convey my greetings and make a promise. You do not have anything against that I hope?
You are free to wait for whatever you want.
Rience approached Ciri; he looked closely into her eyes.
Your guardian the witch Yennefer he hissed viciously once crossed my path. When she fell into my hands I Rience taught her pain. With these hands these fingers. And I made her a promise that if you fell into my hands princess that you would also learn the same pain. With these hands these fingers…
Risky Bonhart said quietly. Very risky Mister Rience or whoever you are to tease my girl and threaten her. She is vindictive prepare to remember that. Keep I repeat your hands and fingers and all other body parts away from her.
Enough Skellen snapped not taking his eyes from Ciri. Leave him Bonhart. And you Rience calm down too. I have granted mercy but I can think better of it and tie you back to the legs of the table. Both of you sit. Lets talk like civilized people. It seems we have what we want. And the object of our conversation is still under guard. Mister Silifant!
Just look after her well Bonhart gave the chain to Silifant. Like the apple of your eye.
Kenna stayed on the side-lines. Yes she wanted to look at the girl who had generated so much talk lately but she felt a strange compunction to get into the crowd surrounding Harsheim and Silifant who led the enigmatic prisoner to a pillar in the courtyard.
Everyone pushed and stared and tried to touch pinch and scratch her. She walked stiffly limping a bit with her head held high. He has beaten her thought Kenna. But she has not broken.
So this is Falka.
She is a girl barely an adult!
A girl? She is a rogue!
And apparently went up against six men in the Claremont arena…
And how many before… bitch…
She-wolf!
Look at her mare! A wonderful pureblood… And there attached to Bonharts saddlebags what a sword… A wonder…
Leave her alone! Dacre Silifant barked. Do not touch her! Keep your hands out of the affairs of others. And away from the girl too. Do not show her disgust or scorn! Show a little compassion. Give her a bit of room.
If she is going to die Cyprian Fripp the younger showed his teeth maybe we can sweeten and comfort the remnant of her life? Take her to the hay and fuck her?
Of course! laughed Cabernik Turnet. That is not a bad idea. Well go ask The Owl…
I forbid it Dacre cut them off. Can you not think of anything else you whoreson! I told you to leave the girl alone. Andres Stigward stand there with her. Do not take your eyes off her. And any who come too close use the whip!
Damn! cursed Fripp. If not then we do not care. Come on fellas lets go roast a suckling pig and feast. The equinox holiday is today. While the gentry chatter we can celebrate.
Lets go! A drink Dede a jug of rum. Lets drink! Can we Mister Silifant? Mister Harsheim? Today is a holiday and we are not leaving here tonight.
What a good idea! Silifant frowned. Feast and booze! And who will stay here to help protect the girl and be ready to answer the call of Lord Stefan?
Ill stay said Neratin Ceka.
And I said Kenna.
Dacre Silifant looked at them carefully. At last accepting with a wave of his hand. Fripp and company thanked him with a roar.
But watch out during the celebrations! Ola Harsheim warned. Do not take offence if the village girls do not let you fuck them!
Oh yeah! Are you coming with us Chloe? And you Kenna? Will you not change your mind?
No. Im staying.
I was left attached to the pillar shackled with my hands tied. I was watched by two of Skellens people. A further two were standing nearby and paying attention. A tall and very pretty woman. And a man. And a man with a somewhat feminine appearance and movements. Very strange.
The cat was sitting in the middle of the room yawning hard; bored because the mouse it was tormenting was no longer fun. Vysogota was silent.
Bonhart Rience and Skellen or the Owl were still talking in the council hall. I did not know why. I had to expect the worst but I was resigned. Yet another arena? Or were they just going to kill me? Let them I thought Let it finally be over.
Vysogota was silent.
Bonhart sighed.
Do not look into these eyes Skellen he repeated. I just want to make some money. For me I think it is time to retire sit on the porch watching the pigeons. For each of the rats Ill get a hundred florins; for them dead. That puzzled me. How much can this girl really be worth I thought. I figured that if I did not give her to you she would be more profitable in the long run. The old principal of a deal – such a precious commodity is constantly gaining in price. One can bargain…
The Owl wrinkled his nose as if something stunk.
You are sincere even beyond the point of endurance Bonhart. But get to the point clarify. You flee with the girl across Ebbing and suddenly show up and explain everything with the laws of economics. Explain what happened.
What is there to explain? Rience smiled sarcastically. Mister Bonhart has simply learned who the girl really is. And what she is worth.
Skellen did not deign to look. He looked at Bonhart his fish-like eyes devoid of expression.
And this precious girl he drawled this valuable prize that is supposed to guarantee your pension you push into the arena in Claremont and compel her to fight to the death? Risking her life though apparently it is worth much more living. How come Bonhart? Because something is wrong here.
If she was killed in the arena Bonhart did not lower his eyes that would mean that she was worth nothing.
I understand The Owl frowned. But instead of leading the girl to another arena you brought her to me. May I ask why?
Again Rience frowned he found out who she is.
You are smart Mister Rience Bonhart stretched until his joints cracked. You guessed it. I found out that she had trained with the witchers in Kaer Morhen but there was another question. In Geso during an attack on a noblewoman the girl told a baroness that her high birth and title were worth shit and the she should kneel before her. Then I thought that Falka was at least a countess. Curious. First a witcher. Are there a lot of witchers? Then the band of rats second. And the Imperial Coroner chasing after her since Korath in Ebbing with orders to kill third. And more than that… a noble and high-born. Ha I thought I must finally learn who this girl actually is.
He paused.
At first he wiped his moustache on the cuff of his sleeve she did not want to talk. I asked her. I hit her hands and feet with a whip. I didnt want to maim her… but with luck we came across a barber. With instruments to pull teeth. I tied her to a chair…
Skellen gulped audibly. Rience smiled cruelly. Bonhart looked at his sleeve.
She told me everything… As soon as she saw the instruments dental pliers and blades. All of a sudden she became more talkative. Turns out she is…
The Princess of Cintra Rience said looking at The Owl. The heir to the throne. And candidate bride of Emperor Emhyr.
Mister Skellen failed to inform me the bounty hunter twisted his lips. He told me to just kill her; he pointed it out several times. Killed on the spot and without any mercy. But what is this Mister Skellen? To kill the queen? The future wife of your beloved Emperor? Which if you believe the rumors the Emperor only thinks of holy matrimony after which will come a large amnesty.
While pitching his speech Bonharts eyes pierced Skellens. But the Imperial Coroner never looked down.
What does this mean for me? Bonhart asked rhetorically and immediately answered. Shit! So then with regret I had to give up my plans for the little witcheress and princess. I brought this whole mess here Mister Skellen. To talk and come to an agreement… Because this shit seems to be a bit big for one Bonhart…
A good decision something yelled from under Riences arm. A very good decision Mister Bonhart. What you have captured gentlemen is something a little bit too big for both of you. Fortunately you still have me.
What is that? Skellen rose from his chair. What the hell is that?
My master the sorcerer Vilgefortz Rience pulled out from under his arm a silver shiny box. More specifically the voice of my master. Coming from this magical device called a Xenophon.
I greet all those present said the box. It is a shame I can only hear you but some urgent matters prevent me from teleprojecting or teleportation.
Shit this is all we need The Owl swore. But I should have guessed that Rience was too stupid to act on his own. I should have known that you were hiding in the darkness Vilgefortz. Like an old fat spider lying in waiting in the dark waiting for the web to vibrate.
What a most offensive comparison.
Skellen snorted.
And do not try and deceive us Vilgefortz. Rience is using this box not because you are busy but because you are afraid of the army of sorcerers your former comrades of the Chapter who are scanning the world looking for traces of magic with your algorithm. If you tried to teleport they would find you in a flash.
What an impressive knowledge.
We have not been introduced to each other Bonhart rather theatrically bowed to the silver box. But if Im correct Sir Sorcerer Mister Rience here promises to torture the princess. Have I made a mistake? On my soul I am continually making sure of how important this girl is. Everyone is interested in her.
We have not been introduced to each other said Vilgefortz from the box but I know you Sir Bonhart as well. And the girl is certainly important. This Lion Cub of Cintra is of the Elder Blood. And according to the prophecy of Ithlinne her descendants will rule the world.
Thats why you need her?
I only need the placenta. When I extract it from her you can have the rest. Do I hear snorts? What about upset and disgusted sighs? Whose? From Bonhart who every day tortures the girl both physically and mentally? Stefan Skellen who is ordered by traitors and conspirators to kill the girl? Huh?
I eavesdropped on them Kenna remembered lying on the bunk with her hands behind her head. I was standing in a corner and felt. And my hair stood on end. All over my body. And suddenly I understood the terrible mess that I had gotten into.
Yes yes the voice emerged from the Xenophon you betrayed your Emperor Skellen. Without hesitation and at the earliest opportunity.
The Owl snorted with contempt.
The charge of betrayal from the mouth of the arch-traitor as you are Vilgefortz is very tremendous. I would be honored. Had it not smacked of a cheap joke.
I do not accuse you of treason Skellen; I make fun of your naiveté and your inability to treason. Because why betray your master? For Ardal aep Dahy and De Wett dukes in their pathologically offended pride offended that their daughters were repulsed by the Emperor when he planned to marry the Cintran. At the same time they counted on the fact that from their families would arise a new dynasty that their importance would overshadow even the Imperial Majesty. With one stroke Emhyr deprived them of this hope and they decided to improve the course of history. They are not ready for an armed rebellion but they can still kill the girl who moved ahead of their daughters. They do not want to mess their own aristocratic hands so they found a henchman for hire Stefan Skellen who suffers from excessive ambition. How was that Skellen? Do you want to say something?
What for? the Owl cried. And to whom? But you know everything as usual great sorcerer! Rience as usual doesnt know shit! And Bonhart doesnt care…
And you as I have pointed out have nothing to brag about. The Dukes bought you with promises but you are too intelligent not to understand that without the girl you have nothing. They need you as a tool to remove the Cintran and once you have finished the dirty work theyll get rid of you because you are a low-born upstart. They promised you and Vattier de Rideaux positions in the new empire? Not even you yourself believe it Skellen. Vattier is more necessary because of the coup but the secret service will always be the same. They just want to kill with your hands; Vattier they need to control the secret service. Besides Vattier is a Viscount and you are nothing.
Certainly said The Owl Im too intelligent not to have noticed. So then now I am to betray Ardal aep Dahy and join you Vilgefortz? Is that what you want? But Im not a weather vane on a tower! I support the revolution not from opportunism but from conviction. It is necessary to put an end to the absolute tyranny and establish a constitutional monarchy. And after a democracy…
A what?
A government of the people. A system in which people rule. Ordinary citizens of all backgrounds through the most worthy and honorable representatives arising from fair elections…
Rience roared with laughter. Bonhart thunderously joined him. A warm if somewhat grating laugh came from the sorcerer Vilgefortz through the Xenophon. All three laughed until they cried.
Come Bonhart interrupted the mirth. We have not gathered here to party but to talk business. The girl at the moment does not belong to ordinary citizens of all backgrounds but to me. But I can sell her. What is your offer Sir Sorcerer?
Are you interested in power over the world?
No.
Therefore Ill let you Vilgefortz said slowly be present at the same time when I do what I need to to the girl. I know this will please you more than anything else.
Bonharts eyes flashed with white flame. But remained calm.
And more specifically?
More specifically I am willing to pay twenty times your stake. Two thousand florins. Consider Bonhart it is a bag of money that you will not be able to carry yourself; you will need a pack mule. That will suffice for the pension porch pigeons and even the vodka and whores if you keep a reasonable moderation.
All right Sir Sorcerer the bounty hunter smiled seemingly unconcerned. The vodka and those whores have certainly reached my heart. Lets make a deal. However take into account that your first offer is also reflected in this. It is true Id rather watch her die in an arena but your work with a knife I am also quite curious about. Add it as a bonus.
Deal.
That was quick The Owl said wryly. Truly Vilgefortz you have quickly and smoothly made a partnership with Bonhart. A partnership that is societas leonina. But have you not forgotten something? The council room where you sit and around the Cintran are surrounded by armed people. My people.
My dear Coroner Skellen Vilgefortz voice rang from the box. You insult me thinking that in this exchange I want to hurt you. Quite the contrary. Im going to be extremely generous. I cannot ensure your democracy. But I can promise financial assistance logistical support and free access to information that will make you stop being a tool for the other conspirators and become a partner. They will have to reckon with you – Duke Joachim de Wett Duke Ardal aep Dahy Earl Broinne Earl Darvi and all the other noble conspirators. So what if it is societas leonina? Yes if the loot is Cirilla I will take the lions share of the spoils for my as I believe merits. Does this hurt you? At the end of the day you will have benefits that are not small. If you give me the Cintran you can have the position of Vattier de Rideaux in your pocket. And being the head of the secret services Stefan Skellen you can make your various utopias including democracy and fair elections. You see in exchange for the thin teenager Ill grant you the fulfilment of the ambitions and desires of your life. Do you see?
No The Owl shook his head. I can only hear.
Rience.
Yes master?
Give Mister Coroner a sample of our information. Tell him what you know of Vattier.
In your unit said Rience there is a spy.
What?
You heard. Vattier de Rideaux has a mole here. He knows everything you do. Why you do it and for whom. Vattier has gotten to one of your agents.
He approached her slowly. She almost did not hear him.
Kenna.
Neratin.
You were open to my thoughts. There in the council room. You know what I was thinking. So you know who I am.
Listen Neratin…
No. You listen Joanna Selbourne. Stefan Skellen betrays his country and emperor. He conspires. All who are with him will end up on the scaffold. Quartered by horses in Millennium Square.
I know nothing Neratin. I am just following orders… What do you want from me? I serve the Coroner… And who do you serve?
The Empire. Lord de Rideaux.
What do you want from me?
You show common sense.
Leave. I will not betray you; I will not say anything… but go please. I cannot Neratin. I am a simple woman. I do not understand these intrigues…
What am I supposed to do? Skellen addressed me as Officer Selbourne. But whom do I serve? Him? The Emperor? The Empire?
How do I decide?
Kenna leaned back against the wall of the cottage and with a menacing growl drove away the rural brats staring at the chained-up Falka.
A beautiful mess. I can feel the noose. Smell the horse shit on Millennium Square. I have no idea what will happen. But I have to enter for a moment to know her thoughts.
To know who she is.
To understand.
She moved closer Ciri said stroking the cat. She was tall well groomed and very different from the rest of the gang… Even in her own way pretty. She produced respect. The two that were watching me two simpletons who were cursing vulgarly stopped when she approached.
Vysogota was silent.
Then Ciri continued she bowed and looked into my eyes. At that moment I noticed something… something strange… like something hit me in the back of my head. My ears where ringing. For a moment there very clearly before my eyes… Something came into me disgusting slimy… I knew what it was. Yennefer had taught me about it in the temple… But I did not want to allow this woman… So I pushed at the something that was penetrating me pushed and spat out with all the power that I could muster. The tall woman bent and swayed as if hit by a fist and took two steps back… Blood started rushing from her nose. From both holes.
Vysogota was silent.
And suddenly Ciri lifted her head I realized what had happened. I suddenly felt the Power within me. I lost it there in the Korath desert renounced it. Later I could not draw on it; I couldnt use it. And she this woman gave me strength; put the sword in my hand. This was my chance.
Kenna staggered and sat down heavily in the sand shaking her head and fumbling around on the ground like a drunk. Blood poured from her nose and spilled over her lips and chin.
What is… Andres Vierny sprang up but suddenly he grabbed his head with both hands opened his mouth and from his lips came a shout. With wide eyes he stared at Stigward. The mans nose and ears were also bleeding and his eyes were clouded. Andres fell to his knees and turned to Neratin Ceka who stood to one side and watched calmly.
Nera…tin…Help…
Ceka did not move. He watched the girl. She looked up at him and he reeled.
There is no need he warned her quickly. Im on your side. I want to help. Stop Ill cut the ties… Heres a knife open up your collar. I will bring the horses.
Ceka… Andres choked from his stifled larynx. Traitor…
The girl looked into his eyes again and fell to the floor motionless. Stigward curled up into the fetal position. Kenna still could not get up blood dripped in thick drops down her chest and abdomen.
Alarm! cried Chloe Stitz who suddenly appeared from behind a corner of the building. Alarm! Silifant! Skellen! The prisoner is escaping!
Ciri was already in the saddle. Her sword was in her hand.
Yaaa! Kelpie!
Alaaaarm!
Kenna clawed at the sand. She could not get up. Nor would her feet which felt like wood obey her. A psionic she thought Ive run into a superpsionic. This girl is ten times stronger than me… Luckily I have not been killed… How am I still even conscious?
From the surrounding houses approached a group headed by Ola Harsheim Bert Brigden and Til Echrade also rushing into the square were Dacre Silifant and Boreas Mun. Ciri turned and yelled and galloped towards the river. But from that way armed men were approaching as well.
Skellen and Bonhart rushed out of the council building. Bonhart held a naked sword. Neratin Ceka shouted approaching them on his horse knocking down Skellen. From the saddle he threw himself directly at Bonhart and held him to the ground. Rience appeared in the doorway and stared like a fool.
Get her! Skellen yelled rising from the ground. Catch her or kill her!
Alive! Rience cried. Aliiiive!
Kenna watched as the girl moved away from the palisade along the shore changed direction and headed for the gate. She saw Cabernik Turent jump into her path she saw the sword flash and saw the crimson stream flow from Turents neck. Dede Vargas and Fripp the Younger also saw it. They decided not to get in the way of the girl and moved in-between the cottages.
Bonhart jumped up smashed the pommel of his sword into Neratin Cekas head and slashed him across the chest. He immediately jumped up after Ciri. The wounded and bleeding Neratin still managed to grab him by the foot only to let go when Bonharts sword speared through him into the sand. However those few moments were enough.
She spurred the mare to move past Silifant and Mun. Skellen bent like a wolf came running from the left waving his hand. Kenna saw something shining in flight then saw the girl swaying in the saddle and from her face gushed a fountain of blood. She leaned back so far that for a moment her back lay on the haunches of the mare. But before she fell she straightened up grabbed the saddle and held onto the horses neck. The black mare galloped through the crowed of armed men and rushed straight towards the revolving gate. Behind her ran Mun Silifant and Chloe Stitz with a crossbow.
We have her! Boreas Mun shouted triumphantly. She cannot get out no horse can jump seven feet!
Do not shoot Chloe!
Chloe Stitz did not hear the shouted command. She stopped. She raised the crossbow to her cheek. Everyone knew that Chloe never missed.
Youre a dead man! she cried. A dead man!
Kenna saw an unknown short man run up pick up a crossbow and shoot Chloe in the back. The bolt passed through her with an explosion of blood. Chloe fell without a sound.
The black mare galloped up to the revolving gate and threw back its head. And it jumped. It rose gracefully and flew above the gate extending its front legs and glided like a black velvet line. The hind hooves did not even brush the upper beam.
Gods! Dacre Silifant shouted. By the gods what a horse! Worth its weight in gold!
The mare for anyone who catches her! Skellen cried. To the horses! To the horses and the chase!
When the gate was finally open the pursuers galloped from the village dust rising behind them. Ahead raced Bonhart and Boreas Mun.
Kenna stood up with effort. She staggered and sat down heavily on the sand. Her feet tingled painfully.
Cabernik Turnet was not moving lying in a pool of blood with his legs and arms wide apart. Andres Vierny was trying to stand and Stigward was still unconscious.
Collapsed on the sand Chloe Stitz looked like a small child.
Ola Harsheim and Bert Brigden brought before Skellen the short man who had killed Chloe. The Owl sighed. And shook with rage. From a shoulder strap across his chest he pulled off a second metal star like the one he had thrown at the girls face a moment before.
Go to hell Skellen said the short man. Kenna finally remembered his name. Mekesser. Jediah Mekesser the Gemmerian. She had met him in Rocayne.
The Owl stooped and violently waved his hand. The six-pointed star howled through the air and stuck deep into the face of Mekesser between the eyes and nose. He did not even scream just began to tremble spasmodically between the embrace of Harsheim and Brigden. He trembled for a long time and his bared teeth were so ghastly that everyone turned their heads. All except the Owl.
Make sure you retrieve my Orion Skellen said with a wave of his hand after the body finally hung lifeless in the arms that held him. And throw the carrion in the manure along with the other carrion the hermaphrodite. Let there be no more trace of these disgusting traitors.
Suddenly the wind howled and the clouds rushed overhead. Suddenly it was very dark.
The guard was changed on the walls of the citadel. The Scarra sisters were a snoring duet. Kohout pisses noisily into an empty bucket.
Kenna pulled the blanket up to her chin.
They did not find the girl. She had disappeared. She had just disappeared. Boreas Mun – incredibly – lost track of the mare after three miles. Suddenly without warning it grew dark; the wind bent the trees nearly to the ground. It burst into rain the thunder roared and the lightning flashed.
Bonhart did not give up. They returned to Unicorn. They screamed at each other – Bonhart The Owl Rience and the fourth mysterious scratchy inhuman voice. They had the whole gang in the saddle; the only people who remained were those unable to ride – like me. They took with them peasants with torches who knew the surrounding forests. They returned at dawn.
They came back with nothing. Discounting the horror they had in their eyes.
The rumors Kenna remembered only started a few days later. At first everyone was afraid of The Owl and Bonhart. They were so mad that it was better to stay out of their way. Even a careless word from Bert Brigden an officer earned him a blow from Skellens whip. But then he talked about what happened during the chase. The small straw unicorn suddenly grew to the size of a dragon and frightened the horses so that the riders fell to the ground it was only by a miracle that they did not break their necks. Across the sky galloped a fiery cavalcade of skeletal ghosts mounted on skeletal horses and at their head rode the terrible king who ordered his servants to erase the traces of the hooves of the black mare with their ragged cloaks. A macabre choir of nightjars cried a blood-chilling song. And they heard the terrifying howls of a ghostly Beannshie the messenger of death…
The wind rain clouds trees and bushes in the darkness and the mysterious events Boreas Mun spoke of who was also there with fear in his eyes. That was the whole story. And the nightjars? The nightjars he added were always screaming.
And the trail the trail of hoof prints that suddenly disappeared as if the horse had taken flight?
The face of Boreas Mun a tracker who could trace a fish through water stiffened at this question. The wind was responsible; the wind blew away all traces in the sand and leaves. There is no other explanation.
Some even believed him Kenna recalled.
Some even believed that it was all a natural phenomenon or delusions. And even I laughed at them.
But I stopped laughing. After Dun Dare. After Dun Dare no one laughed again.
When he saw her he drew back in fright and inhaled sharply.
She had mixed with goose fat soot from the fire place making a thick mass which she used to blacken her eye sockets and eyelids extending the lines out across her temples and to her ears.
She looked like a demon.
From the fourth island along the banks go into the swamp forest he repeated the instructions. Then follow the river to the three dead trees thence by the willow trees directly to the west. When the pines appear along their edge is a river. You turn at the ninth fork and follow until it doesnt twist anymore. After that you will be at village of Dun Dare; to the north there are cottages. Right behind them at the crossroads is a tavern.
I remember. Ill find it dont worry.
Be especially careful at the bends in the river. Beware the places where the reeds are less frequent. Or places overgrown with knotweed. And if you are caught out there at dusk before the pine trees stop and camp until dawn. You must not at any cost ride through the swamp at night. Its almost the new moon and in addition there are clouds…
I know.
When you come to lake country… head north through the hills. Avoid the main roads; theyll be full of traffic from the armies. You will then arrive at a river – a large river – which is called the Sylte youll be halfway there.
I know you drew me a map.
Oh youre right. I forgot.
Ciri checked her saddlebags several times. Mechanically. She did not know what to say in order to delay what had to be said.
I am glad that I met you he said before she could. Truly. Goodbye witcheress.
Goodbye hermit. Thank you for everything.
She was sitting in her saddle and about to spur Kelpie when he came over and grabbed her hand.
Ciri. Stay. Wait for winter to pass…
Ill get to the lake before the frost. And then if you were right I do not have to worry about winter. Ill be teleported to Thanedd. To the school of Aretuza to Lady Rita… Vysogota… how much time does it…
The Tower of the Swallow is a legend. Remember. Only a legend.
I too am only a legend she said bitterly. From birth. Zireael Swallow child surprise. The chosen one. Child of destiny. Child of the Elder Blood. I have to go Vysogota. Be in good health.
Be in good health Ciri.
The tavern at the crossroads behind the village was empty. Cyprian Fripp the Younger and his three companions had refused access to the frightened locals and travelers. They however feasted and drank for days sitting in the cold room full of smoke which smelled like the usual stink that taverns got in winter when the windows and doors do not get opened – sweat cats mice shoes pine birch fat ash wet clothes and steaming vapor.
What shitty service Yuz Jannowitz repeated for perhaps the hundredth time making a sign to the servants to bring more vodka. The plague on the Owl leaving us in this shitty town! Better to be out on patrol in the woods!
Come on youre not stupid Dede Vargas replied. Out there it is cold as ice! I prefer the warmth. And the girls!
He patted a serving girl on the buttock with a vengeance. The girl shrieked not too convincingly and with distinct apathy. The work at the inn had taught her that if they patted or pinched you you had to shriek. The guests loved it.
Since the second day of being there Cyprian Fripp and his companions had grabbed the two serving girls. The innkeeper was too afraid to protest and the girls were too tired to think of protesting. Life had taught them that if a girl protests then they beat her. Therefore it was wiser to wait until they grew bored.
Its that fucking Falka said Rispat la Pointe continuing another topic from their boring evening talks She is dead somewhere in the woods I tell you. I saw Skellens Orion slice open her face and the blood spurted out like a fountain! She could not have survived that.
The Owl failed said Yuz Jannowitz. He only grazed her with the Orion. True he did her mug a little damage. But does that hinder a girl who can jump over a palisade? Did she fall from the horse? Shit! When we measured the palisade it was seven feet and two inches high! And she jumped it! And between the saddle and her ass you could not have gotten the blade of a knife.
Blood flowed from her like a stuck pig protested Rispat la Pointe. She rode and fell off and died in a ravine wolves have eaten the meat and crows and ants have stripped the bones clean from what was left of the carcass. Finally Deireádh. So here we are rotting away waiting for our money. And it is because they cannot find that bitch!
It cannot be because a corpse doesnt leave a trace or a mark Dede Vargas said with conviction. There is always something – a skull pelvis. Rience the sorcerer will find the remains of Falka. Then that will be the end.
And then we can leave this fucking dump Cyprian Fripp the Younger said his gaze boring into the wall of the tavern which he knew every nail and stain and this fucking liquor. And both of these wenches who reek of onions and who when you fuck them are as still as a rock and stare at the ceiling and pick their teeth.
Anything is better than boredom Yuz Jannowitz decreed. I want to howl! Shit I want to do something! Anything! Lets set fire to the village at least there will be something to do!
The door creaked. The sound was so unexpected that everyone jumped from their seats.
Out! roared Vargas Get out old man! Stinking beggar! Go into the yard!
Leave him alone Fripp waved his hand bored. Hey he is dragging bagpipes with him. Hes probably an old veteran; old soldiers play it safe by playing and singing in taverns later in life. Its cold out in the yard. Let him sit here in the warmth…
But far from us Jannowitz showed the old man where he could sit. We are already besieged by lice. I can see them slowly crawling around all over the place. Anyone would think there are turtles not lice.
Innkeeper! Fripp called out imperiously. Bring the old man something to eat! And our spirits!
The old man removed his big fur hat and gracefully nodded his head.
Thank you gentlemen he said but today is the holiday of Saovine. The holiday does not lend with one being driven into the rain and freezing muck. The festival agrees to treat…
Its true Rispat la Pointe slapped his forehead. Today is indeed the holiday of Saovine! The end of October!
It is a night of monsters. The innkeeper had brought the old man some water soup. A night of spirits and ghosts!
Ha ha! Yuz Jannowitz said. The old man will regale us with a tale of old!
Let him Dede Vargas yawned. Anything is better than this boredom!
Saovine Cyprian Fripp said. Its been five weeks since Unicorn. And two weeks of us just sitting here. Two whole weeks! Saovine ha!
A night of monsters the old man licked the spoon he poked around in the bowl with his finger then pulled it out and popped it in his mouth. A night of ghosts and witchcraft!
What did I tell you? Yuz Jannowitz smiled. We will have old wives tales!
The old man scratched and hiccupped.
The feast of Saovine he began emphatically is the last night before the November new moon and for the elves is the last night of the old year. When the new day dawns it is New Years for the elves. So there is a custom among the elves on Saovine night to light all the fires around the house and one pitch torch which they will save the remains of; and that same torch will be lit again at Belleteyn. And it is not just the elves that do this but even some of ours to keep them well and protect them from evil spirits…
Spirits! Yuz snorted. Listen to what this fool is saying!
This is the night of Saovine! the old man said with a passionate voice. On this night spirits walk the earth! The spirits of the dead knocking on the windows. Let us in they moan! It is good to give them porridge with honey; you can also sprinkle it with vodka…
Vodka youd keep for yourself and sprinkle down your throat chortled Rispat la Pointe. And your spirits can kiss my ass!
Oh good sirs please do not make fun of the spirits because they have a keen sense of hearing and are vindictive! It is Saovine night! Listen can you hear sounds and knocking? They are the dead who come from another world; they want to sneak in and warm themselves by the fire and eat their fill. There out in the bare woods with the freezing wind they will be pulled towards houses where there is fire and heat. And do not forget to put food in a bowl on the threshold or in the barn because if they find nothing to eat they can after midnight enter the house…
Oh gods! one of the girls on duty whispered then cried loudly because Fripp had pinched her on the bottom.
Not a bad story! Fripp said. But still too far away to be good! Innkeeper pour the old man a mug of mulled wine maybe he can accomplish a better tale. A good fable about ghosts boys because the girls are listening to them and not serving!
The men laughed when they heard the shrieks of the girls who were listening in. The old man took a sip of warm wine making lots of noise and belching.
Do not overindulge and fall asleep! Vargas warned him menacingly. You are here to entertain! Tell tales sing and blow on the bagpipes! Be merry!
The old man opened his mouth in which a single tooth appeared like a milestone in an open field.
But good sirs today is Saovine! What would I play? The music of Saovine is the rustling of the wind on the window! The howling of werewolves and vampires and the groaning of ghouls! Beannshies call and moan and whoever hears it is ensured an early death. All evil spirits leave their dens witches fly to the last conclave before winter! Saovine is a night for spirits monsters and ghosts! Do not enter the forest because it will devour you! Do not enter a cemetery because the dead will walk! And it is best not to leave your home and to be sure hang a new iron knife over the threshold and evil will not dare cross it. Mothers should keep children close on Saovine night because a human baby can easily be grabbed by a rusalka or they may turn them into a mutant. And a woman who is pregnant best not go outside lest the evil eye see her and take the baby from the womb! Instead of a child she will bear a striga born with iron teeth…
Oh gods!
With iron teeth. First it eats the mothers breasts. Afterwards it eats her hands. Then it eats her face… Oh Im also hungry…
Take this bone there is still meat on it. You need to eat more in your old age or youll get unhealthy ha ha! And you girl give us more vodka. Come on old man; tell us more ghost stories!
Saovine good sirs is the last night when ghosts can fly through our world and try and remove the cold from their bones… Later they descend into hell into the ground where it is always winter. Therefore from Saovine until February when Imbaelk is celebrated is the most convenient time to look in scary places for treasures. If for example in the warm season someone began digging in a mound they would awaken two or three wights who would jump up and eat the treasure hunter. But between Saovine and Imbaelk it is safe to dig as much as you please because the wights will sleep like an old bear.
The things that the old fart invents!
It is true good sirs. Yes Saovine night is terrible and yet it is magical and best for all sorts of predictions and prophecies. On such a night it is best to read from the palm or turn the cards or see omens like the white rooster onion cheese or rabbit intestines or a dead bat…
Bah!
On the night of Saovine the night of terrors and phantoms… It is best to stay at home… around the fire. With the whole family…
The whole family Fripp the Younger repeated the last words and grinned at his companions. The whole family you heard? Along with lists that makes a week of knowing where people are cunningly concealing themselves!
The blacksmiths wife! Yuz guessed immediately. The local beauty! Beware your head Fripp. Today you were almost caught in her house. So what lads? Do we go to the blacksmiths home?
Maybe soon Dede Vargas drawled. Before my eyes upon reaching the village she was bouncing those tits and shaking that ass… I went for her but that idiot Dacre Silifant got the jump on me… Well Silifant is far away and the blacksmiths wife sits at home! What are we waiting for?
We have already killed the mayor of this village Rispat raised his eyebrows. We beat the bastard who came to his defense. How many more deaths do we need? The blacksmith and his son are brawny as oaks. They do not fear us. We will have to…
Hurt them Fripp calmly finished. Just hurt them a little nothing more. We will finish our drinks and go into the village to celebrate Saovine! Lets find a sheepskin and cover ourselves and go down there roaring. The yokels will think we are devils or wights!
Do we bring the blacksmiths wife back to our rooms or do we as in my land Gemmera do it before the eyes of the family?
One does not forget that said Fripp the young man looked out through the window into the night. Shit that is a strong wind. Even the poplars are bending!
Oh ho ho! said the old man from behind a pitcher. That is no ordinary wind sir. Witches fly through the air on their broomsticks to coven meetings seeding the air behind them with potions from their mortars to clean away tracks. There is no escape for a man who gets caught by them in the forest!
Go frighten the children with your tales old man!
Do not mock me sir in this evil hour. Let me tell you that the worst witches come from Countesses and Princesses and do not ride on broomsticks no! Those ride on their black cats!
Ha ha ha ha!
It is true! Because Saovine is the only night of the year when cats can become mares as black as pitch. And woe to him who in the night black as pitch hears the pounding of hooves and sees the witch on her black mare. Whoever the witch finds will not escape death. She spins around him like a leaf blowing in the wind and pulls him to hell!
Im beginning to like this story! Finish it when we get back! When we return here we will party! Well dance here and fuck the blacksmiths wife… What is it Rispat?
Rispat la Pointe who had left to go into the yard to relieve his bladder ran back inside his face as white as snow. He was gesticulating wildly pointing to the door. He failed to utter a word. And it was not necessary. From outside came the sound of a horse neighing.
A black mare Fripp said his face almost touching the window glass. The same black mare. Its her.
The witch?
Falka you idiot.
Its her spirit! Rispat gasped. A ghost! She could not have survived! She has died and come back as a ghost! On the night of Saovine.
She will come in the night black as pitch muttered the old man clutching his empty glass to his stomach. And those who she sees will not escape death…
To arms to arms! Fripp said feverishly. Quickly! Cover the door on both sides! Fortune smiles! Falka doesnt know we are here and has come to warm up the cold and hunger have driven her out of hiding! Right into our hands! The Owl and Rience will shower us in gold! Grab a weapon…
The door creaked.
The old man leaned over the table top his eyes narrowed. He saw badly. His eyes were tired ruined by glaucoma and chronic conjunctivitis. In addition the tavern was dark and smoky. Therefore he didnt see the slim figure that came into to the room from the porch wearing a leather jacket trimmed in musk with a hood and scarf hiding her face. Instead the old man had a good ear. He heard the muffled cry of one of the serving girls the clatter of boots and the innkeeper cursing in a low voice. He could hear the clinking of swords in their sheaths. And the quiet scathing voice of Cyprian Fripp.
We have you now Falka! You were not expecting us here huh?
I was expecting you the old man heard. He trembled at the sound of that voice.
He saw the movement of the slender figure. He heard a gasp of horror. The muffled cry of one of the serving girls. He could not see that the girl called Falka had removed the hood and scarf. He could not see that her face was terribly maimed. And her eyes painted with a paste of fat and soot made it seem like she had the eyes of a demon.
Im not Falka said the girl. The old man saw her move again fast and blurred. He saw something glint in the light of the oil lamps. Im Ciri from Kaer Morhen. Im a witcher. I came here to kill.
The old man who in his life had experienced more than one tavern brawl had developed a method to avoid injury; by diving under the table shrinking down as much as you can and holding onto the table legs. From that position obviously you could not see anything. Nor did he want to. He held tightly to the table even when the table was thrown across the room along with other bits of furniture. All around him clattered heavy boots and echoing commands shouts insults and the blows of heavy steel.
A serving girl screamed shrilly incessantly without stopping.
Someone rolled onto the table moving the piece of furniture along with the old man clinging to it and fell down beside him. The old man shouted to feeling of warm blood splash him. Dede Vargas the man who at first wanted to kick him out – the old man recognized him by the brass buttons on his jacket – screamed gruesomely thrashing about spurting blood and banging his hands around him. One of the random blows caught the old man straight in the eye. The old man ceased to see anything. The serving girl who was screaming gasped fell silent took a breath and began to scream again in an even higher pitch.
Someone fell heavily onto the ground again splashing blood on the newly-scrubbed pine floorboards. The old man did not know that the man who had died now was Rispat la Pointe; Ciri had cut him in the side of the neck. He could not see as Ciri performed a pirouette right in front of Jannowitz and Fripp and was ripping through their guard like a shadow or gray smoke. Jannowitz jumped after her like a quick cat. He was a skilled swordsman. Securely standing on his right foot he attacked with his long reach directly for the girls face right at the ugly scar. He had to hit.
He missed.
He failed to protect himself. She slashed at him closely with both hands across the chest and abdomen. She jumped back turned and all the while evading the slashes of Fripp she slashed at Jannowitz neck. Jannowitz collapsed with his head falling back. Fripp stepped over the dead man and launched a quick slash. Ciri blocked it made a half pirouette and gave him a short cut on his thigh. Fripp staggered and stumbled into the table losing his balance he instinctively held out his hand. When his hand was on the table Ciri with a quick blow cut it off.
Fripp raised the bloody stump looked at it carefully and then looked at the hand that was on the table and collapsed suddenly violently and landed hard on his bottom on the ground just as if he had slipped on soap. Once seated he began to howl a sharp piercing howl like a wild wolf.
Crouched under the table covered with blood the old man listened for a moment to the ghostly duet – the screaming serving girl and Fripp howling uncontrollably.
The girl was silent first finishing her inhuman screams with a shriek. Fripp merely fell silent.
Mother he said suddenly very clearly and fully conscious. Mama… What is… what … what happened to me? What I… is?
Youre dying said the girl with the maimed face.
The old mans hair stood on end the little that was left. To stop his trembling he clenched his teeth on his sleeve.
Cyprian Fripp the Younger uttered a sound as if swallowing with difficulty. Then he made no more noise. None.
There was absolute silence.
What have you done… groaned the innkeeper in the silence that followed. What did you do girl…
Im a witcher. I kill monsters
Well hang… Theyll burn down the town and the inn!
I kill monsters she repeated her voice suddenly changing to something like amazement.
The innkeeper groaned and sobbed. The old man slowly got out from under his hiding place under the table. He moved to avoid the body of Dede Vargas with the horrible slashed face.
You ride a black mare… he muttered. At night in pitch dark… removing the tracks behind you…
The girl turned to look at him. She had had time to cover her face with her scarf and her eyes surrounded by glossy black circles watched him.
Those you see stammered the old man will not escape death… Because you are death itself.
The girl looked at him. For a long time. And quite indifferent.
Youre right she finally said.
Somewhere in the swamps far away but much closer than before sounded the plaintive howl of a Beannshie.
Vysogota lay on the ground on which he had fallen while getting out of bed. He confirmed with horror that he could not get up. His heart beat up in his throat strangling him.
He knew whose death the cry of the elven spirit announced. Life was beautiful he thought. In spite of everything.
Gods… he whispered. I know I dont believe in you… But if you exist…
A monstrous pain suddenly exploded in his chest under his breastbone.
Back in the swamps far away but much closer than before the Beannshie screamed a third time.
If you exist protect the witcheress on her journey!
I have such big eyes to better see you growled the Wolf resolutely. I have such big hands to better grab you and embrace you! With me everything is big; I will thoroughly convince you of that soon. Why are you looking at me so strangely little girl? Why do not you answer?
The sorceress smiled. I have a surprise for you.
Flourens Delannoy
The Surprise from Fairy Tales and Folk Stories
CHAPTER ELEVEN
The initiates stood motionless before the High Priestess straight tense silent and a little pale. They were ready for the road prepared to the smallest details. Gray mens clothing for travel warm but not constricting jackets comfortable elven boots. Their hair was cut short or styled so that it would not interfere with their work and they could easily keep marching in order. Their small knapsacks were packed only with food and the necessary equipment for the journey. The Army would supply everything else. The army for which they had volunteered.
The faces of the girls were calm. Seemingly. Triss Merigold noticed the two girls slightly trembling hands and lips.
The wind blew through the bare branches of trees in the Temple Park. Rotted leaves drifted over the boards of the courtyard. The sky was indigo blue. There was snow in the air. You could smell it.
Nenneke broke the silence. Have you been assigned?
Not me murmured Eurneid. For now Im to spend the winter in a camp near Vizima. The Advertising Commissioner said the mercenary units from the north will be situated there until spring… I am to be a field surgeons assistant for these units.
But I Iola the Second smiled palely have already been assigned. To the field surgeon Mr. Milo Vanderbeck.
I trust that you will not bring any disgrace to me. Nenneke fixed both initiates with a stern thoughtful look. To me to the temple or to the name of the Great Melitele.
Certainly not Mother.
And make sure you get enough sleep.
Yes Mother.
Youll be up til you drop working with the wounded unable to sleep. Youre going to doubt going to be afraid of looking on pain and death. And then you find it easy to cope by using a narcotic or a stimulant. Be careful.
We know Mother.
War fear murder and blood – the High Priestess pierced both of them with her eyes – mean moral decline and on top of that it is a strong aphrodisiac for some. How it will affect you you brats you cannot currently know. Please tell me you will be careful. And if it does come to something you should take a contraceptive. Nevertheless if one of you gets into trouble then make a wide detour of the quacks and village women! Seek a temple and most preferably a sorceress.
We know Mother.
Thats all. Its time now for you to get your blessing.
One after the other she put her hand on their heads hugged them and kissed them. Eurneid sniffed. Iola the Second started blubbering. Although her own eyes glistened a little more than usual Nenneke snorted. No scenes no scenes she said sharply and started to bristle. You go into an ordinary war. And you will come back. Take your belongings and farewell.
Farewell Mother.
They left the temple at a brisk pace not looking back. They followed the two girls with their eyes – the High Priestess Nenneke the sorceress Triss Merigold and the scribe Jarre.
The latter gave a strong meaningful cough.
What? Nenneke looked sideways at him.
You allowed it! the young man muttered bitterly. You allowed the girls to sign up! And I? Why can I not? Should I continue to turn over musty parchments here within these walls? I am neither a cripple nor a coward! It is shameful for me to sit in the temple when even the girls…
Those girls interrupted the High Priestess have spent their entire young lives learning to heal people and to care for the sick and wounded. They do not go to war out of patriotism or love of adventure but because there will be countless wounded and sick to care for. A mountain of work day and night! Eurneid and Iola Myrrhe Katje Prune Deborah and the other girls are the Temples contribution to the war. The Temple as part of this society contributes to the society. It contributes trained specialists to the army and the war. Do you understand that Jarre? Specialists! Not animals for the slaughter!
Everyone joins the army! Only cowards stay at home!
Youre talking rubbish Jarre Triss said sharply. You understand nothing.
I want to go to war… The lads voice broke. I want to… save Ciri…
Please Nenneke said mockingly. The knight wants to rush to the rescue of his. On a white horse…
They fell silent under the gaze of the enchantress.
And now Ive had enough of this Jarre her look almost shattered the young man. I have told you I will not allow it! Back to the books! Learn. Your future is science. Come Triss. Lets not waste any time.
A canvas was spread in front of the altar. On it laid a bone comb a cheap little ring a shabby book cover and a faded blue sash. Iola the First a priestess with the second sight leaned over the object.
Hurry not Iola warned Nenneke who was standing next to her. Concentrate slowly. We do not want a flash of prophecy not a puzzle with thousands of solutions. We want a picture. A clear picture. Take on the aura of these things they have heard Ciri Ciri has touched them. Take on the aura. Slowly. There is no hurry.
Outside the wind howled and snowflakes clumped together. The roof and courtyard of the temple were quickly covered in snow. It was the nineteenth day of November. The full moon.
I am ready mother said Iola the First with her melodic voice.
Go ahead.
Wait a minute. Triss rose from the bench like a spring and threw the chinchilla fur coat from her shoulders. One moment Nenneke. I want to go into a trance along with her.
That is dangerous.
I know. But I want to see. With my own eyes. I owe her. Ciri… I love this girl like a little sister. In Kaedwen she saved my life while risking her own head… The voice of the enchantress suddenly broke.
The High Priestess shook her head. Just like Jarre. Rushing to the rescue blindly headlong without knowing where or why. But Jarre is a naive lad. Youre an adult and supposedly should be a wise magician. You should know that you cannot help Ciri by going into a trance. What you can do is hurt yourself.
I will go along with Iola in a trance repeated Triss as she bit her lip. Allow me to Nenneke. By the way what do I risk? An epileptic seizure? Even if that happened youd get me out.
You risk said Nenneke slowly seeing something that you must not see.
The thought of Sodden Hill filled Triss with horror. Where I am dead. Where I am buried and my name is carved into the obelisk monument. The hill and the grave that will someday memorialize me.
I know that. It has been prophesized to me.
Ive made up my mind she said coolly and patiently as she stood up and stroked her beautiful hair behind her neck with both hands. Let us begin.
Nenneke knelt down and rested her forehead in her folded hands.
Let us begin she said quietly. Get ready Iola. Kneel down beside me Triss. Take Iola by the hand.
Outside it was night. The wind howled the snow fell.
In the south beyond the Amell Mountains in Metinna in the countryside called Hundred Lakes a place that was five hundred miles away in a straight line from the city of Ellander and the Temple of Melitele a nightmare frightened the fisherman Gosta. Awake Gosta could not remember the content of the dream but a strange restlessness left him unable to sleep.
Any fisherman who knows his business knows that you can only catch perch at first ice.
This years winter although unexpectedly early played pranks and was moody like a beautiful and successful woman. The first frost and snow had come like a thief in a treacherous ambush in early November just after Saovine because no one had reckoned on snow and frost that early and there was still plenty of work to do. The lakes were covered with a thin layer of ice and by mid-November it seemed that it could bear the weight of a man. But the moody winter suddenly backed away – it was autumn again and the rain softened the ice sheet as a warm south wind jumped over the shore and melted the drifts. What the hell wondered the country people is it now winter or is it not?
It lasted for a mere three days and then winter came back. This time it came without snow but seized the frost like a blacksmith with his tongs. It cracked. The water dripping from the edges of the roofs became the sharp teeth of the icicles overnight and the startled ducks were frozen by a hair in the duck ponds.
And the lakes of Mil Trachta groaned and solidified into ice.
Gosta waited a day for safety then took the box from the attic with the fishing equipment that he would carry on a strap over his shoulder. He stuffed his boots properly with straw put on his fur coat took his ice pick packed his bag and hurried to the lake.
As we know you can only catch perch at first ice.
The ice was strong. It bent a little as it bore the weight of the man cracked a little but it held. Gosta walked freely over the surface struck a hole in the ice with his pick sat on the box wrapped the line made from horsehair around a short rod of larch wood tied the fishing hook onto the line and hung it in the water. The first perch half a yard long bit even before the hook had dropped and the line was clamped.
After an hour had passed a good half hundred green striped fish with blood-red fins lay around the hole in the ice. Gosta had more perch than he needed but the fishing fever did not leave him. In the end he could distribute the fish to the neighbors.
He heard a long snort.
He looked up from the hole in the ice. A splendid black horse stood on the shore of the lake hot steam shooting from its nostrils. Its rider was wearing muskrat fur and had covered his face with a scarf.
Gosta swallowed. It was too late to escape. He secretly hoped however that the rider would not dare to walk on the thin ice with the horse.
He was still mechanically moving the rod and a perch jerked on the line. The fisherman pulled it out removed the hook and threw it onto the ice. From the corner of his eye he saw the rider jump out of the saddle toss the reins over a barren bush and cautiously approach the ice. The perch floundered on the ice spreading its spiky tail and moving its gills. Gosta stood up and bent over for the pick which could serve as a weapon if needed.
Do not worry.
It was a girl. Now that she took off the scarf he saw her face disfigured by an ugly scar. She carried a sword on her back he could see the beautifully-carved handle that towered over her shoulder.
I will not harm you she said softly. I just want to ask for directions.
To where? Gosta thought. Now in the winter? After the frost? Who travels in winter? Only a bandit. Or a necromancer.
Is this region the Mil Trachta?
Yes… he muttered his eyes directed to the hole in the ice into the black water. Mil Trachta. But here we say Hundred Lakes.
And the lake Tarn Mira? Do you know of that?
All know of it. He looked anxiously at the girl. Only here we call it Bottomless. A cursed lake. A hideous shoal… It has fairies that drown people. And ghosts live in the accursed ancient ruins.
He could see her green eyes flash.
There are ruins? A tower perhaps?
A tower? He could not suppress a disparaging snort. A couple of stones on top of one another covered with moss. A pile of rubble…
The perch was no longer struggling it only moved its colorful striped gills.
The girl looked at it thoughtfully. Death on the ice she said. There is something captivating about that.
Huh?
How far is it to the lake and the ruins? Which way do I ride?
He said it. Then he showed it. He even scratched it into the ice with the sharp end of the ice pick. She nodded her head and memorized it. The mare pounded its hooves on the ice lake snorted and blew steam out its nostrils.
He watched as she moved away towards the western shore galloped up the slope and faded against the backdrop of leafless alders and birch into the beautiful enchanted forest which was adorned with a coating of white frost. The black mare ran with indescribable elegance sharp but also lightweight. You could hardly hear the sound of its hooves against the frozen ground and the snow barely rippled from the branches that they grazed. Running through this ancient and frost-covered enchanted forest it did not appear to be an ordinary horse but rather a magical horse.
But perhaps it was an apparition?
A demon on a ghost horse a demon who had assumed the form of a girl with big green eyes and a disfigured face?
Who if not a demon travelled in the winter? And asked for directions to haunted ruins?
After they had ridden away Gosta quickly packed up his belongings. On his way home he walked through the woods. It was a detour but reason and instinct warned him not to use the road. Reason told him that the girl was after all not a ghost but a human. The black mare was not an apparition but a horse. And those who ride alone on horseback through the wilderness in the winter are all too often pursued.
An hour later the pursuers galloped along the forest path. Fourteen horses.
Rience shook the silver box again cursed and beat it against his pommel in anger. But the Xenophon remained silent. How enchanted.
Magical bullshit commented Bonhart coldly. Its broken – the cheap fairground trick.
Or Vilgefortz is demonstrating how important we really are to him added Stefan Skellen.
Rience raised his head and measured both of them with evil eyes. Thanks to this fairground trick he noted sharply we are on the track and will no longer lose her. Thanks to Master Vilgefortz we know where the girl wants to go. We know where we are riding and what we are doing. I think thats a lot. Compared to what youve done over the past month.
Dont talk so much. Well Boreas? What do the tracks say?
Boreas Mun sat up and cleared his throat. She was here an hour before us. Where she can she tries to ride fast. But this is difficult terrain. Even on that incredible mare she isnt more than five or six miles ahead of us.
She travels to the lake so resolutely murmured Skellen. Vilgefortz was right. And I did not believe him…
I didnt either confessed Bonhart. But only up to the moment yesterday when the farmers confirmed that some magical building actually is on the shore of Lake Tarn Mira.
The horses snorted and steam ran through their nostrils. The Owl looked over his left shoulder at Joanna Selborne. He had not liked the facial expression on the telepath the past couple days. Im getting worried he thought. This chase has exhausted all of us physically and mentally. Its time to stop. High time.
A cold shiver ran down his spine. He remembered the dream he had last night.
All right! He pulled himself together. Enough talking. To the horses!
Boreas Mun hung from the saddle on the lookout for signs. It was not easy. The ground was frozen hard and the loose quickly-windswept snow remained only in furrows and depressions. Boreas was looking for the shoe prints of the black mare. He had to be extremely careful that he did not lose the trail especially now that the urgency of the silver boxs magical voice was silent and there was no more advice or information.
He was inhumanly exhausted. And worried. They had pursued the girl for nearly three weeks – since Saovine since the massacre at Dun Dare. Almost three weeks in the saddle always on the chase. And all this time neither the girl nor the black mare had showed weakness or slowed down.
Boreas Mun was on the lookout for signs.
His thoughts constantly returned to the dream he had last night. In the dream he was bogged down sunken. The black surface had closed over his head as he sank to the bottom and cold water penetrated his throat and lungs. He had woken up soaked in a hot sweat – although all around there had been a true freezing chill.
Thats enough he thought as he was hanging from the saddle on the lookout for signs. Its high time to stop.
Master? Can you hear me? Master?
The enchanted Xenophon was silent.
Riences shoulders shivered violently as he breathed into his clammy hands. The bitter cold bit his neck back and aching loins. Every movement brought pain to his mind. He had even lost the desire to curse.
Almost three weeks in the saddle on a relentless chase. In penetrating cold. And for a few days with frost setting.
And Vilgefortz was silent.
We are also silent. And look at each other askance. Rience rubbed his hands and put on his gloves. Skellen he thought looks at me strangely. Is he planning some treachery? He reached agreement with Vilgefortz a little too quickly and a little too easily… But this squad these thugs who are so loyal to him carry out his orders. If we get a hold of the girl he is capable of ignoring the deal killing her and using these conspirators of his to carry out his crazy ideas of democracy and civil rule.
Or maybe Skellen has already had enough of the conspiracy? As a born conformist and opportunist maybe he is now thinking its better to bring the girl to Emperor Emhyr?
He looks at me strangely. Like an owl. And the whole squad… That Kenna Selborne…
And Bonhart? Bonhart is an unpredictable sadist. When he speaks of Ciri his voice trembles with anger. Depending on the discretion he would execute or kidnap the girl to make her fight in the arena. The deal with Vilgefortz? That agreement will not matter to him. Especially now that Vilgefortz…
He took out the Xenophon. Master? Can you hear me? It is Rience…
The machine was silent. Rience didnt even curse.
Vilgefortz is silent. Skellen and Bonhart have made an agreement with him. But in a day or two when we catch up to the girl it may turn out that there is no agreement. And then I will be the one to get a knife in the throat. Or made to ride in shackles to Nilfgaard as the Owls proof and pledge of loyalty…
Damn it!
Vilgefortz is silent. He does not give advice. Does not show the way. Does not scatter doubts with his calm logical true-to-the-depths-of-his-soul voice. He is silent.
Perhaps Skellen was right? Perhaps Vilgefortz really has turned to something else and does not care about us and our destiny?
For all the devils I did not think this would happen. If I had known this I would not have… I would have ridden to kill the witcher instead of Schirru… Damn it! Im freezing out here and Schirru is surely sitting in the warmth…
When I think that I myself urged that I be sent after Ciri and Schirru be sent after the witcher… I myself asked for it.
Back then in the beginning of September when Yennefer fell into our hands.
The world that had just been a surreal soft muddy sticky blackness turned to solid surfaces and contours in a split second. If it was bright. It was real.
Yennefer opened her eyes shaken by convulsive tremors. She was lying on rocks down the middle of corpses rigging and tarred boards – the remnants of the dragon boat Alcyone. All around she saw feet. Feet in heavy boots. One of these boots had kicked her to consciousness a moment ago.
Get up witch!
Again a kick brought pain that penetrated to her roots. Then she saw a face bend over hers.
Get up I said! On your feet! Do you recognize me?
She blinked. She recognized him. Because she had once burned his face as he fled through a teleport in front of her. Rience.
We will settle he promised. We will settle everything you whore. I will teach you what pain is. With these hands and with these fingers I will teach you what pain is.
She tensed clenched her fists and opened them again about to cast a spell. And immediately they writhed together. She choked gasped and shook.
Rience roared with laughter. Not working? she heard. You do not have even trace power! You are no equal with Vilgefortz at spells! He has squeezed it all out from you to the last drop as the whey from the cheese. You cannot even…
He did not finish. Yennefer drew the stiletto from the sheath fixed to the inside of her leg jumped up like a cat and pushed blindly. She did not succeed the blade only grazed its goal tearing the fabric of his pants. Rience jumped back and fell down.
Immediately a hail of punches and kicks rained down on her. She howled as a heavy boot stomped the dagger from her hand and pressed down crushing her thumb. Another boot stomped onto her abdomen. The sorceress was writhing and gasping. She was torn from the ground and her arms were twisted behind her back. She saw a fist flying towards her and the world suddenly flared up in sparks as her face exploded in pain. It ran down her spine into her abdomen and womb. Her knees turned to soft jelly. She hung powerlessly in the hands that held her. Someone grabbed her by the hair yanking her head up. She took another blow to the eye and everything blurred and disappeared in a blinding flash.
She did not faint. She felt. She was being beaten. Violently beaten cruelly beaten like a man. With blows that were not only painful but also drained you of energy beat out of any will to resist. She was beaten and twitched in the steely grip of many hands.
She wanted to faint but could not. She felt.
Enough she suddenly heard from far away passing through the veil of pain. Have you gone mad Rience? Are you trying to kill her? I need her alive.
I promised her master growled the wavering shadow in front of her which gradually became the shape and face of Rience. I promised her that Id get back at her… With these hands…
I care little what you promised. I repeat I need her alive and able to articulate speech.
Neither a cat nor a witch said the one who held her by the hair laughing can have the life beaten out of them so easily.
Do not voice wise speeches Schirru. I said that is enough beating. Raise her head high. How are you Yennefer?
The sorceress spat out red and lifted her swelling face. At first she did not recognize him. He wore a mask that covered the entire left side of his head. But she knew who it was.
Go to hell Vilgefortz she stammered as she gently touched her tongue to her front teeth and bruised lips.
How do you like my spell? Did you like it as I lifted you up along with this boat from the sea? Did you enjoy the flight? Which spells did you place on yourself that you have managed to survive the fall?
Go to hell.
Destroy the star necklace around her throat. And take her to the laboratory. We will not waste any time.
She was dragged pulled and sometimes carried. Over a stony plain that held the smashed pieces of the Alcyone. And the remainder of many other wrecks their towering frames like the ribs of the skeletons of sea monsters. Crach was right she thought. The ships that have disappeared without trace over the Sedna-depth were not victims of natural disasters. Gods… Pavetta and Duny…
A distant mountain peak rose above the horizon in the cloud-covered sky.
Then came walls gates cloisters and stairs. Everything was somehow strangely and unnaturally large… There were still too few details for her to be able to orient herself to know where she was where she had fallen where the spell had brought them. Her swollen face made it even more difficult to observe. Smell had become her sole sense that provided information – she immediately smelled formalin ether and alcohol. And magic. The odors of a laboratory.
She was brutally placed on a steel chair. Cold clamps closed painfully on her wrists and ankles. After the steel jaws of a vice were fixed to her temples trapping her head she looked around the spacious and dazzlingly brightly lit room. She saw another chair a strange steel structure on a stone pedestal.
That she heard Vilgefortzs voice behind her. That little chair is for your Ciri. It has waited a long time it can wait no longer. Me neither.
She could tell he was close could almost feel his breath. He pushed needles into her scalp and stuck something firmly to her ear lobe. Then he stood before her and took off his mask. Yennefer sighed involuntarily.
This is the work of that very same Ciri he said pointing to the once classically beautiful now horribly ravaged face that was framed by gold clasps and retainers that held a multi-faceted crystal in the left eye socket. I tried to catch her when she entered the portal in the Tower of Gulls said the sorcerer quietly. I wanted to save her life I was sure the portal would kill her. How naive I was! She went through smoothly with such force that the portal broke and exploded in my face. I lost an eye and my left cheek and a lot of skin on my face neck and chest. It was very unpleasant very tedious and very complicated. And it is very ugly is not it? Ha you should have seen me before I started to magically regenerate.
If I believed in that sort of thing he said while pushing a curved metal tube into her nose I might think this is the revenge of Lydia van Bredevoort. From beyond the grave. I can regenerate but slowly. It is time-consuming and laborious. Especially with the regeneration of the eyeball there are problems… The crystal I have in my eye socket serves its purpose well – I see three dimensions but the lack of a natural eyeball sometimes really drives me to despair. Indeed Ive developed an irrational anger – I swear that when I capture Ciri immediately afterwards Ill instruct Rience to remove one of those big green eyes. With his fingers. These fingers as he likes to say. You are silent Yennefer? But you already know that I desire to tear one of your eyes out as well? Or both eyes?
He pushed thick needles into the veins at the top of her hands. Sometimes he did not find his mark instead hitting the bone. Yennefer gritted teeth.
Youve made trouble for me. Forced me to stop working. Put me in danger. When you sailed your boat on the Sedna-Deep beneath my extractors… The echo of our brief duel was strong and widespread it may be noticed by uninvited and perky ears. But I could not help myself. The idea that I could have you here that I could link you to my Orter was too tempting.
Because surely you did not think – he put in the next needle – that I had fallen for your provocation? That I had taken the bait? No Yennefer. If you believe that you are confusing the sky with the stars which are reflected in the pond at night. Truthfully I should thank you – you tracked me down. When you went to the Depth you made my task easier. Because I you see cannot locate Ciri not even with the help of this device here which has no equal. The girl has strong innate protective mechanisms – a strong anti-magic aura and screening. After all she is of the elder blood… Nevertheless my Super-Orter should have discovered her. But it could not.
Yennefer was quite enmeshed in a web of silver and copper wires surrounded by a scaffolding of tubes made of silver and porcelain. Tripods mounted on the chair held glass vials that fluctuated with colorless liquids.
Ive therefore concluded – Vilgefortz pushed another tube into her nose this time it was made of glass – that the only way to locate Ciri is an empathic probe. For this however I needed someone with whom the girl had a sufficiently strong emotional connection and has developed an empathic matrix algorithm and mutual sympathy to borrow a neologism. I thought of the witcher but he has vanished and also witchers are unsuitable to use as mediums. I was about to abduct Triss Merigold our Fourteenth of the Hill. I have considered the kidnapping of Nenneke from Ellander… But then came along Yennefer of Vengerberg you almost volunteered… Really I could not have hoped for anyone better… Connected to the apparatus you will locate Ciri for me. The operation however requires cooperation on your part… But there are as you know means to force someone to cooperate.
Of course he continued as he wiped his hands you should get a few explanations. For example – where and how did I learn of the elder blood? Lara Dorrens heritage? What exactly is this gene? How is it that Ciri has it? Who did she inherit it from? In what way will I get it from her and what am I going to use it for? How does the Sedna Extractor which I pulled you through work and what is its purpose? A lot of questions are there not? But unfortunately I lack the time to tell you of anything to explain everything. Ha its a shame because Im sure youd be amazed by some of the facts Yennefer… But as I said I do not have time. The elixirs are beginning to take effect. It is time that you begin to concentrate.
The sorceress gritted her teeth gasped and made deep muffled groans.
I know Vilgefortz nodded. He drew a large professional megascope closer and monitored a large crystal ball on a tripod surrounded by a silver cobweb of wires. I know but this is very regrettably required. And very painful. The sooner you start with the locations the sooner its over. Well Yennefer. Here on this screen I want to see Ciri. Where she is whom she is with and what she is doing along with where and with whom she is sleeping.
Yennefer screamed piercingly wildly desperately.
It hurts Vilgefortz fixed both his living eye the dead crystal eye on her. Certainly it hurts. Locations Yennefer. Do not block yourself. Do not play the heroine. You know that you cannot stand it. The result of the resistance can be distressing it can lead to a cerebral hemorrhage you could get a double-sided paralysis or enter a vegetable state for the rest of your life. Locations!
She clenched her jaw until her teeth began to crack.
Well Yennefer the magician said gently. At least out of curiosity! You must be curious about how your student is coping. Perhaps she faces a threat? Maybe she is in trouble? You know how many people want Ciris death. Locations. If I know where the girl is Ill get there. She will be safe… no one will find her here. No one.
His voice was velvety and warm.
Locations Yennefer. Locations. I beg you. I give you my word: I will only take from Ciri what I need. And then Ill give you both your freedom. I swear it.
Yennefer gritted her teeth even more. A trail of blood flowed over her chin.
Vilgefortz abruptly stood up and waved his hand. Rience!
Yennefer felt a device being attached to her hands and fingers.
Sometimes said Vilgefortz bent over her there are stubborn situations in which magic potions and narcotics simply cannot substitute good old classic pain. Do not make me do so. Locations.
Go to hell Vilgefortz!
Pull the screws Rience. Slowly.
Vilgefortz looked at the unconscious body being dragged across the floor towards the stairs that led into the dungeon. Then he looked up at Rience and Schirru.
There is always a risk he said that one of you falls into the hands of my enemies and is interrogated. I would like to believe that you would be as strong-minded as her under the screws. Yes I would like to believe that. But I do not.
Rience and Schirru remained silent. Vilgefortz turned again to the megascope where an image appeared on the screen produced by the giant crystal.
Thats all she located he said pointing at the screen. I wanted Cirilla and she has given me the witcher. She did not have the empathic matrix of the girl but when she became weak she gave me Geralts. I would not have believed she had such deep feelings for him… Well I am satisfied with what we have initially learned. The witcher Cahir aep Ceallach the poet Dandelion and a woman? Hmmm… Who will take this job? The final solution to the witcher question?
It was assigned to Schirru Rience recalled as he shifted himself in the stirrups to gain a moments relief from his aching saddle-sore buttocks. Schirru volunteered to kill the witcher. He knew the area where Yennefer had detected Geralt and his company – he had friends or relatives there. I however Vilgefortz sent to the negotiation with Vattier de Rideaux and then to track down Skellen and Bonhart…
And I was a fool then happy because I was sure I had fallen to the far easier and more enjoyable task. And one that I could finish quickly easily and with pleasure…
If the farmers did not lie – Stefan Skellen stood in his stirrups – then the lake is behind that hill there in a valley.
Thats where the tracks lead confirmed Boreas Mun.
Why are we still here? Rience rubbed his cold rigid ear. Spur the horses on and lets go!
Not so fast Bonhart held him back. We scout ahead. Including the valley. We do not know on which side of the lake shes riding on. If we take the wrong side it can suddenly turn out that the lake separates us from her.
Too true Boreas agreed with him.
The lake is frozen over.
The ice may be too weak for horses. Bonhart is right we have to divide our forces.
Skellen quickly gave the commands. The first group a total of seven horses led by Bonhart Rience and Ola Harsheim galloped along the eastern shore and soon disappeared into the black forest.
Good said the Owl. Lets go Silifant.
He immediately noticed that something was wrong.
He turned his horse drove it forward with a whip and rode up to Joanna Selborne. Kennas mount stepped back but her face was like stone.
Its useless Lord Coroner she said hoarsely. We tried to ride with you. We are turning around. We have had enough.
We? cried Dacre Silifant. Who is we? What is this a mutiny?
Skellen leaned over the saddle and spat on the frozen ground. Behind Kenna were Andres Vierny and Til Echrade the bright-haired elf.
Lady Selborne the Owl snapped. Its not the point that you are ruining a promising career and ignoring the opportunity of a lifetime. The point is that you will be handed over to the hangman. Along with these fools who have listened to you.
A man destined to hang can never drown Kenna replied philosophically. But you should not threaten us with the hangman Lord Coroner. Because you do not know who is closer to the scaffold you or us.
You think so? The Owls eyes flashed. This is the cunning conclusion you came to by overhearing someones smart thoughts? Id thought you were wiser. But youre just a foolish woman. With me you always win. Against me you forever lose! Just remember that. And if you think Im done for realize I will still have an opportunity to send you to the scaffold. Do you all hear me? Ill have them tear the flesh from your bones with red-hot hooks!
One dies only once Lord Coroner said Til Echrade gently. Youve chosen your path we are choosing ours. Either way is risky and uncertain. And you do not know what fate has determined for either.
You will not force us – Kenna held her head proudly – to chase the girl like dogs Lord Skellen. And we will not end up killed like dogs as Neratin Ceka was. Oh enough talk. We are turning around! Boreas! Come with us.
No Boreas shook his head and pulled his fur cap over his forehead. Farewell I wish you no harm. But Ill stay. I serve. I have sworn.
Who? Kenna frowned. The Emperor or the Owl? Or the magician who speaks out of the box?
I am a soldier. I serve.
Wait cried Duffi Kriel who rode out behind Dacre Silifants back. Im coming with you. I have also had enough of this! Last night I dreamt of my own death. I do not want to die for this lousy and suspicious cause!
Traitors! yelled Dacre red as a radish. It looked as if he might start spraying blood from his face. Treacherous miserable dogs!
Quiet. The Owl was still glaring at Kenna. His eyes were as repulsive as those of the bird for which he was nicknamed. They have chosen their path you heard them. There is nothing to do but shout and waste spit. But well meet one of these days. I promise you.
Maybe even on the same scaffold Kenna said without irony. Because you Skellen will not be executed with the noble-born princes but with us – the mob. But you are right theres no use wasting spit. We ride. Good luck Boreas. Take care Mr. Silifant.
Dacre spat over his horses head.
And that is everything I have to say – Joanna Selborne raised her head proudly and stroked a dark lock of hair from her forehead – I have nothing to add High Tribunal.
The chairman of the tribunal looked down on her from above. With his almost-gray eyes. His expression was inscrutable.
Oh what the heck thought Kenna Ill try. We only die once all or nothing. Im not going to rot in the citadel waiting for death. The Owl spoke to the wind which could take revenge even from beyond the grave…
What the heck! Maybe they wont notice it. All or nothing!
She put her hand to her nose as if to wipe something away. She looked into the chairman of the tribunals almost-gray eyes.
Guard! said the chairman of the tribunal. Please return the witness Selborne to…
He paused then coughed. Suddenly sweat stood out on his forehead.
…to the law office he concluded and violently pulled air through his nose. Have the relevant documents issued. And release her. The witness Selborne is no longer required by the court.
Kenna secretly wiped away a drop of blood that ran from her nose. She smiled and thanked her magic with a slight bow.
They deserted? Bonhart repeated incredulously. They just deserted? Simply rode away? Skellen? You allowed this?
If they blow the whistle on us… began Rience but the Owl stopped him immediately. They will not because they love their own heads! After Kriel joined them I had only Dacre and Mun and they were four…
Four said Bonhart maliciously is not so much. After we catch up with the girl Ill ride for them. And the ravens will feed on them. In the name of certain principles.
First of all we must catch the girl the Owl interrupted and drove his gray horse forward with the whip. Boreas! Watch the road!
The bell-shaped valley was filled with a dense fog but they knew there would be a lake at the bottom because this was Mil Trachta and in the bottom of every valley there was a lake. However they also knew because the black mares hoof tracks had not been their only way to catch the girl – Vilgefortz had told them to seek this lake. He had accurately described it to them. And the name it was called.
Tarn Mira.
The lake was narrow no wider than an arrow shot. It formed a slightly curved crescent between high steep slopes on which grew a forest of black spruce beautifully dusted with white snow. It was silent on the slopes not a sound could be heard. Even the crows were silent whose ominous croaking had accompanied them for over a dozen days on the road.
This is the south end stated Bonhart. If the magician has not bungled and confused the thing the magical tower should be located at the north end. Watch out for her tracks Boreas! If we lose the trail the lake could separate us from her!
The tracks are clear cried Boreas Mun from below. And fresh! It leads to the lake!
Forward. Skellens gray horse shied in front of the steep slope but he forced it under his control.
Down!
They rode down the slope carefully holding back the snorting horses. They forced their way through the black barren icy bushes that blocked the way to the bank.
Bonharts brown cautiously stepped onto the ice crunching the glass-smooth surface broken by protruding reeds. The ice began to crackle under its hooves and long cracks suddenly ran radially apart.
Get back! Bonhart pulled the reins and turned the snorting beast towards the shore. Dismount! The ice is too thin.
Only on the bank near the reeds estimated Dacre Silifant after he hit the ice with his heel. And even here it is one and a half inches thick. It will carry a horse there is nothing to fear…
His words were drowned out by a curse and neighing. Skellens gray horse slipped and fell on its hind legs resulting in his legs sliding apart. Skellen swore again and hit the horse with his spurs. This time the curse was accompanied by the sharp cracking of ice bursting. The gray horse began to stamp its front feet as its rear collapsed. It struggled in the hole breaking more ice and stirring up the bulging dark waters underneath. The Owl jumped out of the saddle and pulled on the reins but slipped and fell down headlong. He was lucky that he did not fall under the hooves of his own horse. Two Gemmererians helped him to his feet and Bert Brigden and Ola Harsheim drew the neighing gray horse to the shore.
Dismount guys Bonhart repeated looking into the fog that covered the lake. We do not want to take any risks. We will pursue the girl on foot. She will also have been forced to walk.
Too true confirmed Boreas Mun as he pointed to the lake. You can see it.
On the shore where branches hung over the ice was smooth and semi-transparent like dark glass bottles. They could see the brown reeds and other water plants beneath. Further out however the ice was covered by a thin layer of wet snow. And dark footprints stretched as far as the eye could see in the fog.
We have her! Rience cried eagerly throwing his reins over a tree. Shes not as smart as she looks. She went onto the ice in the middle of the lake. If she would have chosen one of the banks or the forest it would have been much more difficult to catch her!
In the middle of the lake… repeated Bonhart with a thoughtful expression. The center of the lake is the shortest and easiest path to this magical tower so Vilgefortz told us. She knows it. Mun? How much advantage does she have?
Boreas Mun who was already on the lake knelt down by a boot print bent down low and looked.
Half an hour he estimated. No more. Its getting warmer but the track has not blurred you can see every nail in the sole.
The lake murmured Bonhart who tried in vain to penetrate the fog with his stare extends more than five miles to the north. Thats what Vilgefortz said. If the girl has a half-hour head start she is about a mile ahead of us.
On smooth ice? Mun shook his head. No sir. Half a mile at most.
All the better! March!
March repeated the Owl. Watch the ice and march forward as quickly as possible!
They breathed heavily. The proximity of the victim excited them and filled them with enthusiasm like a narcotic.
Do not split up!
Just do not lose the track…
And dont get lost in this damn fog… As white as milk… you cant see more than twenty paces…
Toward the pines growled Rience. Faster faster! As long as there is snow on the ice we can follow her footsteps…
The tracks are fresh Boreas Mun began to murmur suddenly. Very fresh… You can see every nail impression… She is directly in front of us… Directly in front of us! Why can we not see her?
And why can we not hear her? wondered Ola Harsheim. Our footsteps resound on the ice the snow crunches! Why can we not hear her?
Because you are prattling Rience violently cut him off. Go on march!
Boreas Mun took off his cap and wiped his sweaty brow. Shes there in the fog he said quietly.
Somewhere in the fog… And we cannot see. We cannot see where she will hit… like before… in Dun Dare… on the night of Saovine… With a trembling hand he drew his sword from its sheath.
The Owl jumped toward him grabbed him by the shoulders shook him vigorously. Stop causing a panic old fool he hissed.
It was already too late. The horror had infected the others. They also pulled their swords and stood instinctively so that they had a comrade at their backs.
She is no ghost! Rience growled loudly. Shes not even a magician! And we have ten men here! It was four at Dun Dare and they were all drunk!
Fan out Bonhart said suddenly form a line to the left and right. And act as a chain! But so that you do not lose sight of each other.
You too? Scoffed Rience. You have also caught the fear Bonhart? I thought you were far less superstitious.
The bounty hunter gave him a look that was colder than ice. Fan out the line he repeated ignoring the magician. Keep this distance. Im turning around to pick up the horses.
What?
Bonhart once again honored Rience with no response. Rience cursed but the Owl laid his hand on his shoulder. Leave him he hissed. Let him go. But lets not waste any time! Form a chain! Bert and Stigward to the left! Ola to the right…
What for Skellen?
If we all travel in a cluster Boreas Mun murmured we could break through the ice. Moreover if we go as a chain there is less danger that the girl will escape to the side somewhere.
Side? Rience said dismissively. How so? The tracks are clearly visible in front of us. The girl travels straight as an arrow and if she did try to hit a hook the track would betray her!
Enough talk the Owl cut off the discussion then turned to look back into the fog where Bonhart had disappeared. Forward! They went.
It is getting warmer… gasped Boreas Mun. The ice is melting from above. It forms a layer of water…
The fog is thick…
But the tracks are still visible noted Dacre Silifant. Besides I think the girl is moving slower. She is losing energy.
So are we. Rience tore his cap from his head and fanned the air.
Be still. Silifant stopped suddenly. Did you hear that? What was that?
I heard nothing.
I did… a kind of crunching… a crunch on the ice… but not from there. Boreas Mun was in the fog where the tracks disappeared. Somehow from the left from the side…
I also heard confirmed the Owl and looked around uneasily. But now its quiet. Damn I do not like this. I do not like it!
The tracks! Rience repeated with bored emphasis. We can still see her tracks! Have you no eyes? She goes straight. Straight! If she turned aside even half a step we would see it in the tracks! March quickly we almost have her! I guarantee we will see the same…
He broke off. Boreas Mun gave a moan that vibrated in his lungs. The Owl cursed.
Ten paces in front of them on the limit of visibility of the milk soup of fog they saw the tracks. They disappeared.
Hell and plague!
What?
Did she fly away or what?
No Boreas Mun shook his head. Shes didnt fly away. Worse.
Rience swore vulgarly and pointed at the grooves cut in the ice.
Skates he growled and clenched his fists involuntarily. She had her skates and has put them on… Now she will fly like the wind over the ice… We will not catch her! Where the hell is Bonhart? Without horses we will not catch her!
Boreas Mun groaned loudly.
Skellen slowly unbuttoned his coat and put his hand across the chest bandolier making sure the line of Orions was easily accessible. We will not have to catch her he said coldly. She will come to us. Im afraid we will not have to wait long.
Have you lost your mind?
Bonhart foresaw this. That is why he turned around to get the horses. He knew the girl was luring us into a trap. Pay attention! Listen for the crunching of ice skates on the ice!
Dacre Silifant turned pale; it was noticeable in spite of his frost-red cheeks.
Boys! he shouted. Look out! Watch out! And form a heap a cluster! Make sure you dont get lost in the fog!
Be still! Snapped the Owl. Be still! Absolute silence or we will not hear…
They heard it. From the left-most distant edge of the chain beyond the fog came a short staccato cry. And a sharp shrill squeak of ice that made their hair stand on end like when you scratch iron on glass.
Bert cried the Owl. Bert! Whats going on?
They heard an unintelligible scream and immediately the head and neck of Bert Brigden ran out of the fog. When he was close he slipped fell and slid across the ice on his belly.
She caught… Stigward he gasped as he stood up with difficulty. Cut him down… in passing… So fast… Ive never seen anything like it… a little sorceress…
Skellen cursed. Silifant and Mun both with swords in hand turned around and stared into the fog.
Crunching. Crunching. Crunching. Fast. Rhythmically. More and more. Increasingly clear…
Where from? cried Boreas Mun as he turned around and held the blade of the sword with both hands in the air. Where?
Be still cried the Owl an Orion in his raised hand. From the right! Yes! From the right! She is coming from the right! Watch out!
On the right wing a Gemmererian suddenly cursed turned and ran blindly into the fog slapping on the melting ice. He did not get far not even out of sight. They heard the sharp crunch of moving skates. They saw a blurred shade scurrying along. And the flash of a sword. The Gemmererian howled. They saw him fall saw the blood squirt wide onto the ice. The wounded man looked around writhing screaming crying. Then he stopped and lay still.
But even as he howled the crunching sound of approaching ice skates came again. They had not expected that the girl could turn so quickly.
She came in among them exactly in the middle. She gave Ola Harsheim a passing cut flat and below the knee. He folded up like a pocket knife. She whirled around in a pirouette and showered Boreas Mun with stabbing shards of ice. Skellen jumped back slipped and grabbed Rience on the sleeve. Both fell down. The skates crunched coldly next to them spraying splinters in their faces. One of the Gemmererians screamed cried and broke off with a wild shriek. The Owl knew what had happened. He had heard a lot of people have their throats cut.
Ola Harsheim screamed and crawled over to the ice.
Crunching. Crunching. Crunching.
Silence.
Stefan stammered Dacre Silifant. Stefan… You are our only hope… Save us… Let us not come to…
She made me lame the biiitch! shouted Ola Harsheim. Help me damn it! Someooone help me!
Bonhart! yelled Skellen into the fog. Bonhaaart! Heeeelp! Where are you you son of a bitch? Bonhaaart!
She surrounded us gasped Boreas Mun as he turned and listened. She runs in the fog around us… and you do not know where she is going to strike… Death! This bitch is death! This is a massacre as in Dun Dare on the night of Saovine…
Keep yourselves together groaned Skellen. Keep yourselves together she preys on individuals… If you see her coming do not lose your head… Throw your swords at her feet – backpacks belts… whatever you can so that she…
He did not finish. This time they did not even hear the crunch of ice skates. Dacre Silifant and Rience saved their lives by throwing themselves flat on the ice. Boreas Mun was able to jump away but Bert Brigden slipped and was brought down. When the girl retreated Skellen threw his Orion. He hit. But the wrong target. Ola Harsheim who had finally been able to stand up fell quivering on the bloody ice and his wide-open eyes seemed to squint at the steel star that pierced him in the nose.
The last of the Gemmererians threw away his sword and began to sob in short jerky spasms.
Skellen rushed to him and punched him with all his strength in the face. Pull yourself together he cried. Pull yourself together man! Its only a girl! Only a little girl!
In Dun Dare on the night of Saovine Boreas Mun said quietly. We created this ice monster. We will not leave this lake. Listen! And hear how death is hastening to you.
Skellen picked up the Gemmererians sword and tried to push it to the sobbing mans hand but it was in vain. The Gemmererian shaken by spasms looked at him with dull eyes. The Owl let go of the sword and jumped towards Rience.
Do something magician he roared shaking him by the shoulders. The horror doubled his strength; although Rience was bigger heavier and bulkier he shook like a rag doll in Skellens grip. Do something! Call your mighty Vilgefortz! Or do some magic yourself! Say a spell call spirits summon demons! Do something anything you dirty scum you dungheap! Do something before this ghost kills us all!
His cry echoed back from the wooded slopes. Before the echo had stopped the crunching of skates could once again be heard. The sobbing Gemmererian fell to his knees and covered his face with his hands. Bert Brigden howled threw away his sword and turned to flee. He slipped fell down and for a time he ran on all fours like a dog.
Rience!
The magician swore and raised his hand. Both his hands and his head trembled as he chanted his spell. However he was able to finish it. But not correctly.
His twitching fingers shot out a thin jet of fire that ploughed through the ice and broke the surface. But it did not break across the line as it should have in order to block the approaching girls path. It broke along the line. It opened the ice with a loud crash and black water gushed forth. The gap rapidly widened and ran towards Dacre Silifant who was watching amazed.
Lie down! screamed Skellen. Flee!
It was too late. The gap ran between Silifants feet and expanded violently breaking the ice up into large glass-like pieces. Dacre lost his balance. The water drowned his cries. Boreas Mun fell into the hole and disappeared under the water. The kneeling Gemmererian and the body of Ola Harsheim also disappeared. Then Rience plopped into the black water immediately followed by Skellen who succeeded at the last minute to cling to the edge. The girl pushed off hard jumped over the gap landed with a splash in the thawing ice and ran after the fleeing Brigden. A moment later a hair-raising shriek pierced Skellens ears and echoed back from the edge of the forest.
She had caught up with Brigden.
Sir… groaned Boreas Mun who had somehow managed to crawl onto the ice. Give me a hand… Lord Coroner…
Skellen ran to the edge and pulled him out where he began to shake terribly. Then Silifant attempted to crawl out but broke the edge of the ice. He disappeared once more under water. But he was instantly up again coughing and spitting. He pulled himself onto the ice with a superhuman effort. He crawled out and lay there exhausted to the utmost. A puddle formed around him.
Boreas groaned and closed his eyes. Skellen trembled.
Save me… Mun… Help…
Rience hung on the edge of ice up to his armpits in the water. His wet hair lay close his to skull. His teeth were chattering like castanets – it sounded like the haunting overture to a hellish Danse Macabre.
Skates crunched. Boreas did not move. He waited. Skellen trembled.
She was coming. Slowly. Blood flowed from her sword leaving a drip line on the ice.
Boreas swallowed. Although he was soaked to the skin with icy water he suddenly became terribly hot.
But the girl ignored him. She looked at Rience who was trying in vain to get onto the ice.
Help me… Rience said through his gnashing teeth. Save me…
The girl slowed down and turned around on the ice with dance-like grace. She stood there with her legs slightly apart holding her sword with both hands steadily across her hips.
Save me… stammered Rience as he clawed his fingers into the ice. Rescue me… And Ill tell… where Yennefer is… I swear…
The girl slowly pulled the scarf from her face. And smiled. Boreas Mun saw the hideous scar and with difficulty repressed a scream.
Rience said Ciri still smiling. You wanted to teach me what pain is. Do you remember? With these hands. These fingers. With these? With which you are now holding onto the ice?
Rience replied but Boreas did not understand it because the magicians teeth were chattering so much that articulate speech was impossible. Ciri turned around on the ice and lifted her sword with one hand. Boreas gritted his teeth convinced that she would deal a death blow to Rience but the girl only got momentum going. To the vast astonishment of the tracking detector she ran away quickly accelerated with sharp foot movements. She disappeared in the fog and for a moment the rhythmic crunch of ice skates fell silent.
Mun… Heeellp… meee… out… Rience forced through his gnashing teeth his chin on the edge of the ice. He threw both arms on the ice trying to cling to it with his fingernails but all of his nails had already broken off. He spread his fingers and tried with palms and joints to grasp the bloody ice. Boreas Mun looked at him and knew with a terrible certainty that…
He heard the crunch of ice skates at the last moment. The girl approached with uncanny speed almost a blur before his eyes. She skated close along the hole in the ice slipped past the tight margin.
Rience cried out. Then he choked on the thick icy water. And then he disappeared.
Next to the ice hole in the beautifully smooth trail of ice skates blood was visible. And fingers. Eight fingers.
Boreas Mun vomited on the ice.
Bonhart galloped on the edge of the slope along the shore at a great rate without worrying about the horse that could break its legs at any minute in the snow-covered holes. The frozen pine branches struck him in the face and lashed over his arms and ice dust poured down his collar.
He could not see the lake; the whole valley was full of mist like a boiling cauldron.
But Bonhart knew that the girl was there.
He could feel it.
Under the ice far below a curious swarm of striped perch swam alongside a sinking object. The fascinating blinking silver box that had slipped from the pocket of a dead body floating in the water above it. Before the box reached the bottom and kicked up a mud cloud the boldest perch even tried to touch it with their snouts. Suddenly they scattered in horror.
The box was letting out strange alarming vibrations.
Rience? Can you hear me? What is happening with you? Why have you not answered the last two days? I am asking for a report! What about the girl? You must not allow her to enter the tower! Are you listening? Do not let her enter the Tower of the Swallow… Rience! Answer me damn it! Rience!
Rience of course was unable to respond.
The slope stopped the bank was flat. The end of the lake Bonhart thought Im on the edge. I have cut off the little girls way out. Where is she? And where is this cursed tower?
The fog curtain suddenly ripped and blew away. And as he looked up he saw her. She was directly in front of him sitting on her black mare. A sorceress he thought she has some connection with this animal. She sent it to the end of the lake to wait for her there.
But that changes nothing.
I have to kill her. To hell with Vilgefortz. I have to kill her. First Ill make sure she pleads for her life… And then I kill her.
He cried kicked his spurs into his horse and went into a breakneck gallop.
And suddenly he realized that he had lost. That she had misled him.
Only a hundred and fifty paces separated them – but it was a hundred and fifty paces of thin ice. In addition the curved surface of the lake was now to the other side – the girl who was riding along the curve was much closer to the end.
Bonhart swore tugged at the reins and drove his horse onto the ice.
Run Kelpie!
Under the hooves of the black mare splashed the frozen ground.
Ciri pressed against the horses neck. The sight of Bonharts pursuit filled her with dread. She feared this man. Just the thought of entering battle with him made her feel as though an invisible fist pressed into her stomach.
No she could not fight him. Not yet.
The tower. Only the tower could save her. And the portal. Just as it did on Thanedd when the magician Vilgefortz was close behind her even reaching out for her…
Her only salvation was the Tower of the Swallow.
The fog lifted.
Ciri pulled on the reins and suddenly felt a monstrous heat flood her. She could not believe what she saw. What was in front of her.
Bonhart saw it too. And cried triumphantly.
There was no tower at the end of the lake. There were not even the ruins of a tower because there simply was nothing. Only a barely visible hardly rising hillock. Crowned by a barren cairn dotted with icy plant stems.
There you have your tower he cried. There is your magic tower! There you have your rescue! A pile of stones!
The girl seemed to hear nothing and see nothing.
She directed the mare towards the vicinity of the little hill to the cairn. She raised both hands toward heaven as if to curse the heavens for what had happened to her.
I told you Bonhart yelled as he kicked his brown with his spurs that you belong to me! That you will do what I want! That no one will stop me! Neither men nor gods neither devils nor demons! Nor an enchanted tower! You belong to me witcheress!
The hooves of the brown sounded on the ice.
The fog suddenly bunched together under the blows of a swirling wind that rose out of nowhere. His brown began to neigh prance and chomp his teeth at the bit. Bonhart leaned down in the saddle and pulled at the reins with all his force because the horse was raging – her head tossed back and forth as she stomped and slid on the ice.
Standing between him – on the shore between him and Ciri – a snow-white unicorn danced and reared up shielding the girl.
Such tricks will not work on me cried the bounty hunter while he got the horse under control. I am not scared by magic! I will catch you Ciri! This time I will kill you witcheress! You are mine!
Again the mist clenched together and took strange forms. The figures were becoming clearer. There were riders. The nightmarish silhouettes of ghost riders.
Bonhart stared.
On the skeletal horses rode the skeletons of horsemen dressed in rust-eaten armor and chain mail scraps of coats and battered and corroded helmets that were adorned with buffalo horns or with the remains of ostrich and peacock plumes. The ghosts eyes shown with a bluish glow from under the visors of their helmets. A tattered banner rattled. At the head of the cavalcade galloped a man armed with a crown on his helmet and a gorget on the chest which showed through his opened rusty cuirass.
Away it droned in Bonharts head. Away mortal. She does not belong to you. She belongs to us. Away!
One could not deny that Bonhart had courage. The ghosts could not frighten him. He overcame the horror and did not fall into a panic.
But his horse turned out to be less resolute.
The brown stallion reared up began to prance a ballet on its hind legs neighed and jumped wildly. The ice broke under the impact of horseshoes with a penetrating crack and the ice floes stood upright as the water shot up. The horse screamed and clapped its hooves on the front edge of the ice which broke. Bonhart pulled his feet from the stirrups and jumped off. Too late.
The water closed over his head. It began to hammer and roar like a bell in his ears. His lungs were threatening to explode.
He was lucky. His feet met with something that surely must have been the sinking horse. He pushed himself and appeared with a flourish spluttering and gasping. He grabbed the edge of the ice. Without panicking he drew his knife cut it into the ice and pulled himself out. He lay there breathing heavily as the water dripped down from him.
The lake the ice the snow-covered slopes the white-covered black spruce forest – all in one fell swoop was illuminated by an unnatural deathly pale light.
With enormous effort Bonhart rose to his knees.
Over the horizon blazed the deep blue sky in a dazzling corona of brightness. A dancing vortex of beams of light shot from the dome of light from the sudden fiery columns and towering spirals. The fast-changing shapes of ribbons and draperies hovered in the sky flashing erratic.
Bonhart began to croak. His throat seemed to be bound by an iron garrote.
At the spot that had just been nothing but a hillock and a cairn of stones a tower now rose.
Majestic willowy smooth shining sculpted from a single block of basalt. In the few windows of the serrated peaks at the top the flickering fire of the aurora borealis flamed.
He saw the girl turn in the saddle to look at him. He saw her bright eyes and the line of an ugly scar on her cheek. He saw the girl driving the black mare forward as they entered without haste into the blackness beneath the stone arch of the entrance.
And they disappeared.
The aurora borealis exploded into blindingly light whirls of fire.
When Bonhart could see once more the tower was gone. There was only a snow-covered hillock and a heap of stones dotted with icy plant stems.
Kneeling on the ice dripping surrounded by a puddle of water the bounty hunter roared wildly horribly. From his knees he stretched his hands toward heaven and he cried screamed cursed and reviled – men gods devils and demons.
The echo of the cry rolled through the wooded slopes and ran across the frozen surface of Lake Tarn Mira.
The interior of the tower immediately reminded her of Kaer Morhen – an equally long black corridor behind the doorway an equally endless abyss in alignment with the columns and statues. She could not understand how this chasm fit in the slender obelisk of the tower. But she knew that trying to analyze it made no sense – not in the case of a tower that sprung up out of nowhere that suddenly appeared where nothing had been before. In such a tower anything was possible and you couldnt be surprised by anything.
She looked back. She did not believe that Bonhart had dared – or had been able – to follow her here. But she preferred to make sure of that.
The archway through which she was riding shone with a bright unnatural light.
Kelpies hooves clattered on the floor which started to crack under the horseshoes. Bone. Skull tibia ribs femur pelvis. She rode through the middle of a giant ossuary. She was reminded again of Kaer Morhen. The dead should be buried in the ground… How long ago was that… At that time I actually believed such a thing… the majesty of death respect for the dead… But death is just death. And a dead man is just a cold corpse. It does not matter where it lies where his bones disintegrate.
She rode into the darkness under arches between columns and statues. The darkness began to weigh on her like smoke. Intrusive whispers and soft sighs urged incantations in her ears. Huge doors suddenly flared up in front of her and opened. They opened one by one. Doors. An infinite number of heavy doors opened silently in front of her.
Kelpies hooves rattled on the ground.
The geometry of the surrounding walls arches and columns was suddenly disturbed so violently that Ciri thought it must not be real. It seemed to her that she was travelling through the interior of some impossible polyhedral body a sort of giant octahedron.
The doors continued to open. But they no longer gave only a single direction. They opened up endless possibilities and directions.
Ciri began to see.
A black-haired woman who holds an ash-blonde girl by the hand. The girl is afraid afraid of the dark afraid of her urgent whisper horrified by the clatter of horseshoes she hears. The black-haired woman with the sparkling star of obsidian on her neck is afraid. But she cannot show it. She continues with the girl. It is her predestination.
Kelpies hooves. The next door.
Iola the Second and Eurneid in short coats knapsacks on their backs marching on a frozen snow-covered road. The sky is deep blue.
The next door.
Iola the First kneeling before the altar. Next to her is Mother Nenneke. They stare their faces twisted in a grimace of horror. What do they see? Past or future? Truth or falsehood?
Above them both Nenneke and Iola – are hands. The outstretched hands of the blessing of a woman with golden eyes. The necklace of the woman is a diamond that shines like the morning star. A cat is on the womans shoulder. A falcon is above her head.
The next door.
Triss Merigold adjusts her beautiful chestnut-brown hair that is tousled by wind gusts. But there is no escaping that wind no protection from it.
Not here. Not on the top of the hill.
On the hillside below a long endless line of shadows. Figures. They go slowly. Some turn to face her. Familiar faces. Vesemir. Eskel. Lambert. Coen. Yarpen Zigrin and Paulie Dahlberg. Fabio Sachs… Jarre… Tissaia de Vries.
Mistle…
Geralt?
The next door.
Yennefer in chains shackled to the wall of a dripping wet dungeon. Her hands are one large mass of clotted blood. Her black hair is matted and dirty… Her lips are cracked and swollen… But in her violet eyes the will to struggle and resist is still not extinguished.
Mother! Hang in there! Hold on! Ill come to the rescue!
The next door. Ciri turned her head away. With regret. And embarrassment.
Geralt. And a green-eyed woman with black short-cut hair. Both naked. Joined rising together. Contributing to each others pleasure.
Ciri gained control of her adrenaline compressed her throat and promoted Kelpie. The hooves clattered. The darkness vibrates with whispers.
The next door.
Hail Ciri.
Vysogota?
I knew that you would succeed my efficient lady. My brave swallow. Have you taken any harm?
I defeated them. On the ice. I had a surprise for them. The skates of your daughter…
I was thinking about psychological harm…
I held back the revenge… Did not kill all that I desired to kill… I did not kill the Owl… Although he was the one who hurt and disfigured me. I controlled myself.
I knew you would win Zireael. And that you would enter the tower. Id read about it. Because thats been described… Its all already been described… Do you know how one earns his degree? Ones ability to use sources.
How can it be that we can talk to each other… Vysogota… Are you…?
Yes Ciri. I am dead. Oh unimportant! More importantly I learned what I sought… I know where those lost days went what happened in the Korath Desert how you disappeared from the eyes of your pursuers…
And how I came here into this tower yes?
The elder blood that flows through your veins gives you power over time. And over space. Over dimensions and spheres. You are now the Mistress of the Worlds Ciri. You are a powerful force. Do not allow worthless criminals to take and abuse you for their own purposes.
I will not allow it.
Farewell Ciri. Farewell Swallow.
Goodbye old crow.
The next door. Brightness dazzling brightness. And the pervasive scent of flowers.
The mist covering the lake light as down was quickly blown away by the wind. The surface of the water was smooth as a mirror and white flowers shone on the green carpet of the shallow sea lilies.
The banks drowned in greenery and flowers.
It was warm.
It was spring.
Ciri was not surprised. How could she wonder at anything now? Because now everything was possible. November ice snow frozen ground the pile of stones on the passing of bare stems hillock – there it was. But here the willowy basalt tower with the serrated peaks reflected in the green lily-strewn waters of the lake. This was May because only in May did the wild rose and black cherry blossom.
Nearby someone was playing on a reed pipe or a flute a fun jumping little tune.
Standing on the shore of the lake with their front feet in the water were two snow-white horses. Kelpie snorted and struck her hoof on the rocks. As the horses lifted their heads and the water dripped from their nostrils Ciri sighed loudly.
Because they were not horses but unicorns.
Ciri was not surprised. She had sighed with admiration not with astonishment.
The melody could be heard more clearly now it came from behind the cherry bushes clustered with white flower. Kelpie went in that direction by herself without any invitation. Ciri swallowed then followed. Both unicorns motionless as statues stared at her. They reflected on the smooth water surface.
Behind the cherry bushes a light-haired elf with a triangular face and huge almond-shaped eyes sat on a round stone. He was playing his fingers danced over the holes of the flute. Although he noticed Ciri and Kelpie although he looked at them he did not stop playing.
The small fragrant white flowers and the black cherries had an intense smell such as Ciri had never experienced in her life. No wonder she thought soberly: In the world where Ive lived the cherries just smell different.
In that world everything is different.
The elf finished the tune with a long high trill put down the flute and stood up.
What took you so long? he asked smiling. What kept you?
The Lady of the Lake
CHAPTER ONE
The lake was enchanted. About that there could be no doubt.
Firstly: it lay beside the mouth of the enchanted valley Cwm Pwcca the mysterious valley perpetually shrouded by fog and famed for its magical properties and phenomena.
Secondly: one look was enough.
The surface of the water was a deep blue like polished sapphire and smooth as a mirror. So much so that the peaks of the mountain Y Wyddfa that were reflected in it were more beautiful than those that loomed over the lake. From the water blew a refreshing coolness and the dignified silence was disturbed by nothing not even the splashing of fish or the cries of a bird.
The knight shook off the impression. But rather than continue riding along the crest of the hill he led his horse down to the lake. As if drawn by the magnetic force of a spell that slumbered there deep down in the dark waters. The horse stepped timidly among the broken rocks giving a snort indicating that he too sensed the magical aura of the place.
Upon reaching the bank the knight dismounted. He took the stallions bridle and led him to where small waves disappeared among the coloured pebbles.
His armour rattled when he knelt. Startling fry and fish as vivid as tiny needles he scooped water into his hands. He drank slowly and cautiously the ice cold water numbed his tongue and lips and hurt his teeth.
When he bent down to collect water a second time a sound travelled over the surface of the lake. He raised his head. The horse whinnied confirming that he also heard it.
He listened. No it was not an illusion. What he heard was singing. A woman singing. Or rather a girl.
Like all knights he had been raised with bards tales of chivalry. In these tales a girl singing or calling was in nine cases out of ten a lure. The knight who followed inevitably fell into an ambush. Often fatal.
But curiosity won out. The knight was only nineteen years old. He was very courageous and very foolish. He was famous for one and known for the other.
He checked that his sword was in its sheath then led his horse and set off up the beach in the direction of the singing. He did not have to go far.
The shore was strewn with huge boulders dark and polished to a bright shine giant toys carelessly tossed here and forgotten about after the completion of a game. Some of the boulders were lying in the water of the lake under the dark surface. Some rose above it and were licked by small waves giving the impression of being ribs of a sleeping Leviathan.
But most of them were lying on the shore from the beach to the forest. Some were buried in the sand and were only partially sticking out leaving the imagination to guess how big they really were.
The singing which the knight heard came from just behind those boulders. The singing girl remained invisible. He led his horse holding him buy the muzzle and nostrils so as to stop him from neighing or snorting.
The girls clothes lay on one of the boulders lying in the shallows flat like a table. The girl herself stood naked waist-deep in the water and was washing singing and splashing in the process. The knight listened to her singing but did not understand the words.
And no wonder.
The girl he would bet his head was not human. This was demonstrated by the slender body the strange hair colour and the voice. He was sure that if she turned around he would see big almond shaped eyes. And if she swept her ashen hair back he would see ears ending in points.
This was a resident of Faerie. A fairy. One of the Tylwyth Teg. One of those which the Picts and the Irish called Sidhe Daoine the People of the Hills. One of those that the Saxons called Elves.
She stopped singing for a moment and immersed herself up to her neck she panted and snarled and cursed. The knight however was not fooled. Fairies as everyone knew knew how to swear like a human being. Some said as obscenely as a stable boy. And the curse was often a prelude to some malicious trick which fairies were famous for – for example increasing the someones nose to the size of a cucumber or reducing the size of someone masculinity to the that of a bean.
The knight had interest in neither the first nor the second option so he tried to slip away quietly. He was betrayed by a horse. Not his own mount who he still held by its nostrils keeping him quiet and calm but the horse belonging to the fairy which the knight had not initially noticed between the boulders. Now the pitch-black mare stamped at the gravel and neighed in greeting. The knights stallion shook his head and replied politely. The echo reaching across the water.
The fairy came splashing out of the water presenting the knight for a moment all her glory pleasant to the eye. She threw herself toward the rock on which lay her clothes. But instead of grasping clothes to decently cover herself with the fairy grabbed a sword and pulled it from its scabbard with a hiss clutching the steel with amazing skill. It lasted a brief moment after which the fairy quickly knelt down hiding in the water up to her nose and holding her arm with the sword in it above the surface of the water.
The knight blinked in amazement dropped the reins and bent his knee kneeling in the wet sand. He understood immediately who it was before him.
Hail O Lady of the Lake he breathed while stretching out his hands it is an honour a tremendous honour… I accept your sword.
Id prefer if you rose and turned around the Fairy poked her mouth above the water. Maybe stop staring? And let me get dressed?
He obeyed.
He heard her leaving the water and the rustling of clothes and the sound of her swearing softly as she pulled them onto her wet body. He busied himself staring at the black mare its coat soft and shiny like the skin of a mole. It was definitely of noble blood and fast like the wind. It was undoubtedly a magic horse and like its owner also an inhabitant of Faerie.
You can turn around.
Lady of the Lake…
And introduce yourself.
I am Galahad of Caer Benic. A knight of King Arthur Lord of Camelot ruler of the Kingdom of Summer as well as Dumnonia Dyfeint Powys Dyfed…
And Temeria? She interrupted. Redania. Rivia Aedirn? Nilfgaard? Would you say any of these names?
No. I have never heard of them.
She shrugged her shoulders. In her hand besides the sword she was holding boots and a shirt washed and wrung out.
I thought so. What day is it?
It is he replied with surprise the second full moon after Beltane… Lady…
Ciri she said unthinkingly twisting her shoulders to better position the clothes drying on her skin. She spoke with a strange accent. Her eyes were green and huge…
She instinctively brushed back her wet hair and the knight sighed involuntary. Not only because her ear was normal human and in no way elven… Her cheek was marred by a huge ugly scar. She had been injured. But how can you injure a fairy?
She noticed his astonished gaze narrowed her eyes and wrinkled her nose.
A scar yes! She said with her striking accent. Why do you look so frightened? Is it such an uncommon thing for a knight a scar? Or is it so ugly?
He slowly with both hands pulled down the hood of his chain mail and passed his hands through his hair.
Certainly not an uncommon thing for a knight he said with youthful pride demonstrating a barely healed scar running from his temple to his jaw. And nasty are the scars of honour. I am Galahad son of Lancelot du Lac and Elaine daughter of King Pelles Lord of Caer Benic. This wound was caused to me by Breunis the Cruel an undignified oppressor of women even though I beat him in a fair duel. Truly I am honoured to take this sword from your hand Lady of the Lake…
What?
The sword. I am willing to accept it.
This is my sword. I dont let anyone touch it.
But…
But what?
The Lady of the Lake has always… Always emerges from the water and gives her sword.
She was silent for some time.
I understand she said finally. Well another country another custom. Im sorry Galahad or whatever your name is but apparently you have not found the lady of which you have heard. I am not giving away anything. Or letting anything be taken. Lets be clear.
But yet he dared to say youve come from the Faerie Lady is it so?
I come she said after a moment her green eyes seemed to stare into the abyss of space and time. I come from Rivia and from the city of the same name. Next to the lake Loc Eskalott. I came here on a boat. It was foggy. I could not see the edges. I heard neighing… Kelpie… My mare had followed me.
She spread her wet shirt out on a stone. The knight gave a start again. The shirt was washed but not very thoroughly. He could still see traces of blood.
The river current brought me here continued the girl without seeing that he had noticed or pretending not to see. The river current and the magic of the unicorn… What do you call this lake?
I do not know he admitted. In Gwynedd there are many lakes…
In Gwynedd?
Of course. Those are the mountains Y Wyddfa. If you keep them to your left and if you go through the forest for two days youll arrive at Dinas Dinlleu and beyond that Caer Dathal. And the river… The nearest river…
Its not important what the nearest river is. Do you have anything to eat Galahad? Im starving. Why are you looking at me like that? Are you afraid that Ill disappear? That Ill fly off with your sausage and biscuits? Dont be afraid. In my world I have created enough mess and I wont be going back for some time. So I will stay in yours for a time. In a world in which I search in vain for the Dragon or the Seven Goats in the night sky. Where we are now in the second full moon after Belleteyn and Belleteyn is pronounced Beltane. Why do you stare at me I ask you?
I did not know that fairies eat.
Fairies sorceresses and elves. They all eat. They drink. And so on.
What do you mean?
It does not matter.
The longer he studied her the more she lost her magical aura and became more human and ordinary – almost mundane. He knew however that such was not the case it could not be. A plain ordinary girl would never have been met alone at the foot of Y Wyddfa on the edge of Cwm Pwcca bathing naked in a mountain lake and washing a blood-stained shirt. No matter how the girl looked in no case could she be an earthly creature. Despite knowing this Galahad could look calmly and without superstitious fear at her mouse coloured hair which to his amazement now that it was dry was traversed by shiny streaks of silver. He could now look at her slender hands her little nose her pale lips her male clothing with a strange cut made with an extremely delicate fabric. And her sword with its strange design and ornaments but which did not seem like an ornament for parades. And her bare feet covered with the dry sand of the beach.
To be clear she spoke wiping one foot with the other Im not a fairy or an elf. A sorceress that is a fairy Im… a little unusual. Ehh Im not.
Im sorry really.
Why are you sorry?
They say… he blushed and stammered. They say that fairies if they happen to encounter a young man they lead them to Elfland and there… Under the bushes in a forest on a bed of moss show them…
I understand she looked at him quickly and firmly bit the sausage. In regards to the Land of the Elves she said swallowing I fled there some time ago and Im in no hurry to return. With regards to the bed of moss… Indeed Galahad you have not found the lady that was needed. Nevertheless thank you for your interest.
Lady! I did not mean to offend you…
Do not apologise.
Its because you are so beautiful.
I thank you again. But this changes nothing.
They were silent for a while. It was hot. The sun at its zenith warmed the stones nicely. A slight breeze wrinkled the surface of the lake.
What does it mean… Galahad suddenly said in a strangely exalted voice. What does it mean a spear with bloody tip? What does it mean and why does the King suffer so from a pierced thigh? What does a lady in white carrying a grail a silver cup…
Are you feeling alright? She interrupted.
Im just asking.
I do not understand your question. Is it a password? A signal with which to recognise initiates? Explain it to me.
I cannot explain better.
Then why do you ask?
Because… he said fidgeting. Just… One of us did not ask when he had the opportunity. Either he could not find the words or he was ashamed… He did not ask and that is why many misfortunes have occurred. So now I always ask. Just in case.
Are there any wizards in this world? You know those dealing in magic. Mages. Seers.
There is Merlin. Or Morgana. But Morgana is evil.
And Merlin?
About half.
Do you know where to find him?
Of course. In Camelot. In the court of King Arthur. Im headed there.
Is it far?
From here to Powys to the river Hafen then up the Hafen to Glevum. From there it is near to the plains near the Kingdom of Summer. All in all about ten days riding.
Too far.
You can he stammered shorten the journey by going through Cwm Pwcca. But it is an enchanted valley. It is horrible. There live the Y Dynan Bach Teg evil dwarves…
Do you only wear your sword for show?
And can a sword do anything against magic?
Can do can do do not doubt. Im a witcher. Have you heard of them? Eh of course you havent heard. And Im not afraid of dwarves. I have many friends among the dwarves.
Sure he thought.
Lady of the Lake?
My name is Ciri. Do not call me Lady of the Lake. It brings back unpleasant memories painful harmful. So they called me in the Land of… What did you call that land?
Faerie. Or as the Druids say: Annwn. Or Elfland by the Saxons.
Elfland… she covered her shoulders with a chequered blanket. I was there you know? I entered the Tower of Swallows and bam! I was among the elves. And thats what they called me. Lady of the Lake. I even liked it at first. It flattered me. Until I realised that in that land in that tower over the lake I was no lady but a prisoner.
Is that he could not hide his curiosity where you stained your shirt with blood?
She paused for a long time.
No she said at last and her voice it seemed was trembling slightly. Not there. You have keen eyes. In short you cannot escape the truth by hiding your head in the sand… Yes Galahad. Im often covered in blood in recent times. With the blood of the enemies Ive killed. And with the blood of friends who I tried to save… and who died in my arms… Why do you look at me like that?
I do not know if you are a goddess or a mortal woman. Or a supernatural being born on earth…
Get to the point if you please.
I wish Galahads eyes flared to hear thy story. Would you tell me O Lady?
It is long.
We have time.
And it does not end happily.
I do not believe that.
Why?
You were singing as you bathed in the lake.
You are observant she turned her head pursed her lips and a frown marred her face suddenly. Yes observant… But very innocent.
Tell me thy story. Please.
Well if you want she sighed. I will tell.
She sat down comfortably. The horses walked along the edge of the forest grazing on grasses and herbs.
From the beginning Galahad prompted. From the very beginning…
More and more it seems to me she said after a moment tightly wrapping the plaid blanket around her my story actually has no beginning. Im not even sure whether it has actually ended. Know that the past and the present intermingle terribly. There was an elf who told me that it is like a snake that bites it own tail. This snake so you know is called Uroboros. And if he bites his own tail it means the circle is closed. In any moment of time is hidden the past present and future. In any moment of time lies eternity. Do you understand?
No.
It doesnt matter.
Truly I say who believes in dreams is like one who wants to catch the wind or is grasping at shadows. Fooled by deceptive images in a curved mirror that lies or twists the truth like a false woman. It is a fool indeed who gives faith to the dream and walks the path of deception.
But even he who has few dreams should not put faith in them and wisely does not. Why if dreams would not have any meaning would the gods gift us the ability to dream?
The Wisdom of the Prophet Lebioda 34; 1
Is all that we see or seem
But a dream within a dream?
Edgar Allan Poe
CHAPTER TWO
A breeze wrinkled the steaming cauldron that was the surface of the lake scattering thin ribbons of morning mist. The oarlocks squeaked and rumbled rhythmically and a bright spray of droplets showered from the oars.
Condwiramurs put her hand on the railing. The boat was sailing at a slow speed and the water rose and fell just over her fingers.
Ah ah she said putting as much sarcasm in her voice as she could. What a speed! We seem to be flying over the waves. My head is spinning!
The rower a short stocky thickset man growled something angry and indistinct not even raising his head of overgrown curly hair worthy of a sheep. The adept was already fed up of the muttering grunting and growling with which the man answered her questions.
Careful she said with difficulty maintaining the peace. From rowing so rapidly you could overturn the boat.
This time the man lifted his face with skin that was as dark as if it had been tanned. He muttered coughed and pointed with his gray stubble chin to a line from a wooden reel mounted on the rail that disappeared into the water straining with the motion of the boat. Apparently convinced that the explanation was enough he continued rowing. With the same pace as before. Oars up. Pause. Lower the oars half into the water. Long pause. Pull. An even longer pause.
Ah Condwiramurs said looking at the sky. I understand. It is important that the lure that you drag behind the boat must move at the proper speed and the proper depth. Fishing is important. Nothing else matters.
It was so obvious that the man did not even both to grunt.
Well who cares Condwiramurs continued her monologue that I have been travelling through the night? That Im hungry? That my ass hurts and itches from the hard wet bench? That I have to pee? No it is only important to catch fish. And it is pointless anyway. The lure that we are dragging behind us in the middle of the stream is not going to catch anything.
The man raised his head and gave her an ugly look. Condwiramurs flashed her teeth in a sly smile. The man continued to row slowly. He was angry. She collapsed on the bench at the stern and crossed her legs. So that the slits in her skirts were as visible as possible.
The man grunted and pulled on the oars with his calloused hands pretending not to watch anything but the tow rope. Of course the speed of the rowing did not accelerate. The adept sighed in resignation and turned to watch the sky.
The oarlocks creaked shiny droplets splashed from the paddles.
From out of the quickly lifting fog appeared the outline of an island. And rising above it the dark obelisk of a domed tower. The man sitting with his back to it was aware that they had almost arrived. Taking his time he placed the oars inside the boat stood up and began to slowly wind the rope on the reel. Condwiramurs still with her legs crossed whistled and watched the sky.
The man slowly rolled up the end of the fishing line and began to view the lure – a shiny brass spoon equipped with a triple hook and a tail of dyed wool.
Oh nothing caught Condwiramurs said sweetly What a shame. I wonder why you were so unlucky? Maybe the boat was moving too fast?
The man gave her a look that said a lot of ugly things. He sat down coughed spat overboard grabbed the oars in his gnarled hands and bent his strong back. The oars splashed stirring in the oarlocks and the boat was launched across the lake like an arrow the water roared and foamed at the bow and circled in whirls at the stern. The distance separating them from the shore was about the quarter of the length of a crossbow shot and they covered the distance in two grunts. The boat slammed into the sand with such force that Condwiramurs fell off the bench.
The man muttered coughed and spat. The adept knew that translated into the language of civilized people as Get out of my boat annoying witch! She also knew that she couldnt count on his arms to get her out. She took off her shoes lifted her skirt to a provocative height and lowered herself from the boat. She swallowed a curse as the shells on the shore dug painfully into her feet.
Thank you she said through clenched teeth for the ride.
Without waiting for the next grunt and not looking back she walked barefoot toward the stone stairs. All the hardships and pains had fled without a trace erased by her growing excitement. She was here on the island of Inis Vitre on the lake Loc Blest. It was an almost legendary place where only a chosen few visited.
The morning fog had lifted almost entirely the red ball of the sun began to shine strongly in the heavens. Above the water crying sea-gulls circled and flew around the battlements of the tower.
At the top of the staircase leading from the shore to a terrace leaning against a statue of crouching grinning chimera was Nimue.
The Lady of the Lake.
She was delicate and small she was no larger than five feet. Condwiramurs heard mention that as a young girl they called her Thumbelina now she saw that the nickname was appropriate. But she was sure that for a least half a century no one had dared say that to the little sorceress.
Im Condwiramurs Tilly she introduced herself with a nod a little embarrassed still with her shoes in her hand. I am happy that you have invited me to your island Lady of the Lake.
Nimue the little sorceress corrected. Nimue and nothing else. We can forgo the titles and epithets Lady Tilly.
In that case Im Condwiramurs. Condwiramurs and nothing else.
Then with your permission Condwiramurs. Well talk over breakfast. I guess you are hungry.
I will not deny it.
The breakfast was rye bread cottage cheese with chive butter eggs and milk. Serving it were two very young and quiet maids who smelled of starch. While dining Condwiramurs felt the stare of the small sorceress.
This tower Nimue said watching every movement of her visitor her every bite has six floors including one underground. Your room is on the second floor youll find all the necessary comforts. The ground floor you see is for the management of the house here is where the rooms for the servants are. In the basement is the laboratory and in the first and third floors are the library and the gallery. To all these floors you have free access and use of all the equipment that is in them whenever you want.
I understand. Thank you.
In the upper two floors are my private rooms and office. In those rooms I have absolute privacy. For the future to avoid misunderstandings note that in this respect I am very sensitive.
I respect that.
Nimue turned her head toward the window through which one could see the gruff fisherman who had managed to unload all of Condwiramurs luggage and now carried in his boat a reel nets and other paraphernalia of the art of fishing.
Im a little old fashioned she continued. But some things… Im used to using some things with exclusive rights. Toothbrushes for example. My private rooms my library my bathroom. And the Fisher King. Please do not try and use the Fisher King.
Condwiramurs nearly choked on her milk. Nimues face expressed nothing whatsoever.
And if… She continued before the woman regained speech. And if he was interested to use you reject him.
Condwiramurs swallowed and finally nodded her head refraining from making any comments. Although she was about to say a stinging rejoinder that rural fisherman were not her type. Especially when they have a gray head and manifest themselves as morose louts.
So Nimue said emphatically. We have made our introductions. It is time to move on to more specific things. Do you want to know why out of so many candidates I choose precisely you?
Condwiramurs if she hesitated a bit before answering would only show that she was pretending not to show too much pride. She concluded that to show Nimue false modesty even if it was only a very small degree would sound too fake.
Im the best at the academy she replied coolly objectively and without boasting. In my third year I had the second best rating in oneiromancy.
I could have had brought to me the first. Nimue said painfully sincere. Incidentally you were proposed to me with honours. Even quite strongly because apparently you are the daughter of someone important. As for dreaming dear Condwiramurs you know that oneiromancy it is a somewhat fickle gift. Failure can happen to even the best dreamer.
Condwiramurs again refrained from a brisk reply that its failures can be counted on the fingers of one hand. After all she was speaking with a master. It is necessary to know peace in matters large and small as one of her professors are the academy was fond of saying.
Nimues reward for her silence was a nod of approval.
I have detailed reports on you she said. I know that you do not need the help of dreaming drugs. I am glad because I do not tolerate drugs.
I dream without drugs Condwiramurs confirmed with pride. With oneiromancy it is enough for me if I have an anchor.
What?
Well an anchor the adept cleared her throat. Something that the subject who Im dreaming about is somehow associated with. Any personal belongings. Or a picture…
A picture?
Yes. Im never wrong with a picture.
Oh. Nimue smiled. Oh if a picture helps then we will not have a problem. If you have finished breakfast lets go the best and second best among the oneiromancers. It would be good for me to explain the other reasons why it is I chose you as an assistant.
The stone walls emitted cold which even the dark wood panelling and carpeting wasnt able to stop. She felt the cold even through the soles of her shoes.
Beyond these doors Nimue pointed out is the laboratory. As I mentioned you can use it as you wish. Of course I recommend caution. Moderation is advised especially if you try and force a broom to carry water.
Condwiramurs laughed out of politeness even though it was an old joke. All the professors in her lectures entertained jokes that related to the mythical trouble of the legendary magicians apprentice.
The staircase wound up like a sea serpent and it seemed to have no end Its stages were high and steep. Before they arrived the young adept was panting and sweating but Nimue seemed to appear unaffected in any way by the effort.
This way please she opened an oak door. Beware the threshold.
Condwiramurs entered and sighed.
The room was a gallery. Its walls were covered with paintings from floor to ceiling. There hung huge oil paintings old chipped and cracked miniatures engravings and yellowed woodcuts faded watercolours and sepia. There also hung here recent works – vivid colours modernist tempera and gouache aquatints and etchings of clean strokes contrasting prints and mezzotints which attracted the eye with its sharp black spots.
Nimue stopped before a picture that was hanging closer to the door depicting a group of people gathered under a huge tree. She looked at the canvas then Condwiramurs… and her silent gaze was extraordinarily eloquent.
Dandelion the adept said realising the point was not to wait singing ballads at the foot of the oak Bleobheris.
Nimue smiled and nodded. She took a step and stood before another picture. A Watercolour.
Symbolism. Two female figures on a hill. Gulls circling above them beneath them on the slopes of the hill a procession of shadows.
Ciri and Triss Merigold. The prophetic vision at Kaer Morhen.
Smile nod step another picture. A rider on a galloping horse a misshapen double row of alders stretching out their arms their branches towards him. Condwiramurs felt a chill go through her.
Ciri… Hmmm… Apparently her night ride to her meeting with Geralt at the Halfling Hofmeiers farm.
The next picture a dark oil painting. A battle scene.
Geralt and Cahir defending the bridge on the Yaruga.
Then faster and faster.
Yennefer and Ciri their first meeting in the temple of Melitele… Dandelion and the dryad Eithne in the woods of Brokilon… The company of Geralt during a blizzard on the mountain pass of Malheur…
Well done Nimue praised. A excellent knowledge of legend. Now you know the second reason why you are here and not someone else.
The wall above the ebony table at which they sat was dominated by a large canvas depicting a battle scene it seemed to be the Battle of Brenna a key moment in the battle or a tacky scene of a death of a hero. The canvas was beyond a doubt the work of Nicholas Certosy you could tell by the expression the perfect attention to details and the artists lighting effects.
Yes I know the legend of the Sorceress and the Witcher said Condwiramurs. I dare say down to the smallest detail. As a child I loved this story I literally listened to the story and read it many times. I dreamed to be Yennefer. But Ill be honest – even if it was love at first sight even if they were explosively passionate… It was not eternal.
Nimue raised her eyebrows.
I learned that the history said Condwiramurs was a popular abbreviation for young people. Later I naturally read a few of the so-call full and serious versions. Dilated to the border of redundancy and sometimes beyond. Then my passion was replaced by cool reflection and the passionate flare turned into something like a marriage of convenience. You know what I mean?
Nimues nod was barely perceptible confirming that she knew.
In short I prefer those legends that cling more to the legendary conventions and do not mix fiction with reality and do not try and combine the simple and straightforward moral of a fairy tale with amoral historical truth. I prefer the legends without the prefaces of the encyclopaedists archaeologists and historians. Those whose conventionalism are free of experiments. I prefer that if the prince comes to the top of Crystal Mountain and kisses Sleeping Beauty she wakes up and the two live happily ever after. Yes no other should end a legend… Who painted this portrait of Ciri? The one on the stand?
There is not one portrait of Ciri the voice of the little sorceress was dry. Neither here nor anywhere in the world. There remains not a single portrait or miniature painted by someone who has seen Ciri or even remembers her. The portrait on the stand shows Pavetta Ciris mother. It was painted by the dwarf Ruiz Dorrit the court painter for the rulers of Cintra. It was documented that Dorrit portrayed Ciri when she was ten years old but the picture had not been preserved. Let us go back to the legend and your relationship with it. In your opinion how should legends end?
They should have a good ending she insisted. Good must prevail. Evil must be punished by way of example; the lovers are joined together until the end of life. And none of the good heroes may die dammit! And the legend of Ciri? How does it end?
Exactly… How?
Condwiramurs was speechless for a moment. She had not expected such a question; she smelled a test an exam a trap. She stopped to avoid being caught.
How ends the legend of Ciri and Geralt? After all everyone knows that.
She stared into the dark tones of the watercolour depicting the clumsy barge moving along the surface over a misty lake a figure standing on the barge was only visible as a black silhouette.
This is how the legend ends. Thats right.
Nimue read her mind.
It is not that certain Condwiramurs. It is not that certain.
The legend said Nimue I first heard from the lips of a wandering storyteller. I was a village child the fourth daughter of a poor cottager. The most beautiful memories from my childhood are days when the wandering storyteller Pogwizd came to our village. I could forget for a few moments my work and in my minds eye I could see these fabulous wonders see this wide open world… A beautiful and miraculous world… Further and more wondrous than the town nine miles away… I was about six or seven years old. My sister was fourteen and she was beginning to slouch from the eternal toil. A womans destiny. We were preparing for it since childhood. Slouching! We were constantly stooped bending our backs to work or to care for the child because the weight of your gut has yet to recover from childbirth… It was these stories of the old man that made me begin to desire more than just toil and bending dream of more than giving birth a husband and children. The first book I bought with the money I got for the sale of blueberries I picked in the forest was the legend of Ciri.
This version as you aptly put it was softened and modified for young people. This was the version for me. I read poorly. But even then I knew what I wanted. I wanted to be like Philippa Eilhart or Sile de Tancarville and Assire var Anahid…
Both looked at the gouache representing a table in the hall of a castle with women sitting around it. Legendary women.
At the Academy continued Nimue into which I entered on the second attempt I was concerned with only the legend of the Grand Lodge and its aspect in the history of magic lectures. I had no time for reading for pleasure at first; I had to occupy my time… to keep pace with the daughters of earls and bankers for which everything was easy they laughed at a village girl…
She paused then snapped her fingers.
Finally she went on. I found time for reading but then I realised that the adventures of Geralt and Ciri held far less interest to me that they did in my childhood. It appears to be a similar syndrome with me as with you. What did you call it? A marriage of convenience?
That was until…
She paused and wiped her hands over her face. Condwiramurs noticed with astonishment that the little sorceresss hand trembled.
I was about eighteen when… when it happened. Something that revived the legend of Ciri in me. I started to deal with it seriously and scientifically. I devoted my life to it.
The adept was silent and listened intently.
Do not pretend like you did not know Nimue said sharply. Everyone knows that the Lady of the Lake is possessed by an almost unhealthy obsession with the legend of Ciri. Everyone gossips about how it started out as a harmless hobby that gradually turned into something like a drug addiction or even mania. There is a lot of truth in these rumours my dear Condwiramurs a lot of truth! And you if you choose to assist will also fall in to mania and addiction. Because I demand it. At least for the duration of your practice. Do you understand?
The adept nodded.
You seem to understand Nimue controlled her emotions. But Ill explain. Gradually. And when the time comes youll know everything. But for now…
She paused and looked out of the window at the lake at the black silhouette of the boat of the Fisher King a contrast to the shimmering golden surface of the lake.
For now rest. Look around the gallery. Look in cabinets and shelves and youll find albums and cardboard prints all related to the legend. In the library are all versions and transformations of the legend and almost all the scientific literature. Give them some time. Look read concentrate. I want you to get inspiration to dream. An anchor as you say.
Ill do it. Lady Nimue?
Im listening.
The two portraits. These hanging side by side… Are these not Ciri?
There are no portraits of Ciri Nimue patiently repeated. Later artists portrayed her only in scenes each according to his own imagination. As for the portraits the one on the left is a variation on the chosen topic it is the elf Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal a person who the painter could not have known. The painters name is Lydia van Bredevoort. One of her surviving oils still hangs in the academy.
I know. And the other portrait?
Nimue looked for a long time at the portrait of a young girl with blonde hair and sad eyes.
She was dressed in a white dress with green sleeves.
Robin Anderida painted it she said she turned to look Condwiramurs straight in the eye. And whom it portrays… That is for you the dreamer and oneiromancy to find out. Dream this. And tell me your dream.
Master Robin Anderida saw the Emperor approaching first and bent low in a bow. Stella Congreve Countess of Liddertal stood up curtsied and with a quick gesture motioned for the girl sitting in the carved chair to do the same.
My greeting ladies Emhyr var Emreis nodded his head. And my greetings to you Master Robin. How is your work?
Master Robin grunted embarrassedly and bowed again nervously wiping his fingers on his apron. Emhyr knew that the artist suffered from severe agoraphobia and was pathologically shy. But who cared about that. What mattered was how he painted.
As usual when he was travelling on the road the emperor was wearing an officers uniform of the Impera Guard Brigade – black armour and cloak embroidered with a silver salamander. He stepped closer and examined the portrait. First the portrait then the model a slender girl with blonde hair and sad eyes. In a white dress with green sleeves and wearing a necklace with a single jewel.
Excellent he said deliberately into space and in such a way that it was not possible to estimate what was praised. Excellent Master. Please continue do not pay any attention to me. If you will allow me a moment Countess.
He walked a few steps towards the window forcing her to follow him.
Im leaving he said quietly. Affairs of state. Thank you for your hospitality. And the princess. Well done Stella. You really should be commended. Her too.
Stella Congreve curtsied deeply and with grace.
The Imperial Majesty is exceedingly kind to us.
Do not praise the day before sunset.
Oh… She pursed her lips slightly. Is that so?
It is.
What is it Emhyr?
I do not know he said. In ten days we resume the offensive in the North. It promises to be a difficult very difficult war. Vattier de Rideaux reveals new conspiracies and plots directed against me. The reasons of state may force many different things.
This girl is not guilty of anything.
I said: reasons of state. Reasons of state have nothing to do with justice. At the end of the day…
He waved a hand.
I want to talk to her. Alone. Come on Princess. Faster. Closer. The Emperor commands.
The girl curtsied deeply. Emhyr measured her with his eyes looking back to that fateful audience in Loc Grim. He was full of praise nay even admiration for Stella Congreve who within the six months that had elapsed since then had managed to transform a clumsy ugly duckling into a young aristocrat.
Leave us he said. Take a break Master Robin say to clean your brushes. You Countess please wait in the anteroom. And you Princess follow me to the terrace.
The wet snow that had fallen during the night had melted in the early morning sun but the roof tops and towers of the castle Darn Rowan were still wet and blazing in the sun like fire.
Emhyr approached the balustrade. The girl according to court etiquette kept one step behind him. With an impatient gesture he beckoned her to come closer.
The Emperor was silent for a long time; he leaned with both hands on the railing staring out at the hills and the evergreen yews that grew on them. Clearly distinguishable from the white rocky limestone recesses. Below them the river gleamed like a silver ribbon winding through the gorge.
The wind brought the scent of spring.
I seldom come here Emhyr said. The girl remained silent.
I seldom come here he repeated turning away. It is a beautiful and peaceful place. Beautiful surroundings… Do you agree?
Yes… Imperial Majesty.
You can smell spring in the air. Have you noticed?
Yes Imperial Majesty.
From the lower courtyard they heard a noisy clatter disturbed by singing and the ringing of horseshoes. The escort which had already received the order to depart were in a hurry to get ready to leave. Emhyr remembered that among the guards was one who sang. Often regardless of the circumstances.
Look down on me regretfully
Eyes of azure
And give me graciously
Your charms
Remember me regretfully
In the dark night-time
Do not deny me graciously
The desire that dwells within you
A beautiful ballad he said thoughtfully passing his fingers over his heavy gold imperial chain.
Beautiful. Imperial Majesty.
Vattier assures me that he is already on Vilgefortzs trail. That locating him will be a matter of days weeks at most. The heads of traitors will fall and the true Ciri Princess of Cintra will be delivered to Nilfgaard. And before the genuine Cirilla Princess of Cintra comes to Nilfgaard I will have to do something with the double.
Lift up your head.
She obeyed.
Do you have any wishes? He asked sternly. Requests? Complaints?
No Imperial Majesty I do not.
Really? Thats interesting. No but then I cannot command that you had. Raise your head as befits a princess. Stella taught you courtly manners?
Yes Imperial Majesty.
In fact he thought they trained her really well. Rience first and then Stella. They taught her the role – certainly under threat of torture and death. They warned her that the part that she would have to play would be before a ruthless and unforgiving audience. Before the terrible Emhyr var Emreis Emperor of Nilfgaard.
What is your name? He asked sharply.
Cirilla Fiona Elen Riannon.
Your real name.
Cirilla Fiona…
Do not try my patience. Name!
Cirilla… the girls voice broke like a reed stalk. Fiona…
Enough by the Great Sun he said through clenched teeth Enough!
In a breach of etiquette she sniffed loudly. Her lips trembled but etiquette did not forbid it.
Calm down he ordered albeit in a low voice almost soft. What do you fear? Are you ashamed of your own name? Are you afraid to tell me? Does it raise unpleasant memories? I only ask because I would like to address you by your real name. But I must know what it is.
Its nothing she said her big eyes suddenly sparkled like emerald in the glow of candles. Because it is a bland name Imperial Majesty. A person who wears it is a nobody. As long as Im Cirilla Fiona I mean something… As long as…
Her voice stuck in her throat so rapidly that she instinctively raised her hands to her neck as if what she had on was not a necklace but a choking garrotte. Emhyr continued to measure her with his eyes still full of praise for Stella Congreve. At the same time he also felt anger. Unfounded anger and therefore even more terrible.
What I do want from this child he thought feeling the anger rising in him as it boiled and seethed like soup in a cauldron. What I do want with this child whose…
Know that I had nothing to do with your kidnapping girl he said sharply. I had nothing to do with your kidnapping. I gave no such orders. I was fooled…
He was angry with himself aware that he was making a mistake. He should have ended this conversation long ago ended it with grace with power menacing like an emperor. It was necessary to forget about this girl with the green eyes. The girl did not exist. She was a double. An imitation. She did not even have a name. She was nobody. The emperor does not ask for forgiveness does not apologise to someone who…
Forgive me he said the words sounded strange unpleasantly sticking to his lips. I made a mistake. Yes its true I am guilty of what happened to you. Guilty. But I give you my word that you will come to no danger no injustice no harm no threat. Do not be afraid.
Im not afraid she lifted her head and etiquette notwithstanding meet his gaze. Emhyr flinched struck by the honesty and trust in her eyes. He immediately straightened the proud and noble emperor once more.
Ask of me what you want.
She looked at him again and he involuntarily recalled countless times when he had bought in this way the peace of mind for the damage of his meanness. He secretly enjoyed selfishly paying the off so cheaply.
Ask of me what you want he repeated and by the fact that he was tired his voice became a little more human. I will fulfil your every wish.
Do not look at me he thought. I cannot bear that look. People are apparently afraid to look at me. What do I have to fear?
Fuck Vattier and his reasons of state. If she asks for it Ill take her home to where she was abducted. Perhaps in a golden coach with six horses. She simply has to ask.
Ask of me what you want he repeated.
I thank you Imperial Majesty said the girl lowering her eyes. His Imperial Majesty is very noble and generous. If I could ask for anything…
Speak.
I want to stay here. Here at Darn Rowan. At the home of Lady Stella.
He was not surprised. He sensed something.
Tact prevented him from asking the questions that would be humiliating to them both.
I gave my word he said coldly. My will be done.
Thank you Your Majesty.
I gave my word he repeated and I will honour it. However I think you chose wrong. You did not choose that which you desire. If you change your mind…
I will not change she said when it was clear that the emperor was not going to finish. Why would I change my mind? I have chosen Lady Stella I have chosen things that I have experienced in my life so little… A house warmth kindness… Love. You cannot make a mistake when choosing something like that.
Poor naive little thing thought Emhyr var Emreis Deithwen Addan yn Carn aep Morvudd – The White Flame Dancing on the Barrows of his Enemies. It is such desires that are filled with the most terrible mistakes.
But something – perhaps long-forgotten memories prevented the Emperor from saying it out loud.
Interesting Nimue said when she heard the story. A very interesting dream. Were there any others?
Bah! Condwiramurs cut the top off of the boiled egg with a knife. My head is still spinning after that parade! But this is normal. The first night in a new place always produces chaotic dreams. Do you know Nimue for us it is claimed that our talent lies in the fact that we have dreamlike visions. We do not use hypnosis or a trance; our visions are no different from other peoples dreams in intensity or abundance or content. Unique to us and this is what our talent determines… We remember our dreams. Rarely do we forget what we dream of.
Because you have atypical and typical activities in your endocrine glands said the Lady of the Lake. Your dreams are and Im trivialising a bit nothing more than a body dedicated to endorphins. Like most innate magical talents yours is also prosaically organic in origin. But why am I explaining something that you yourself already know. Do you remember any more dreams?
A young boy Condwiramurs frowned travelling with a pouch over his shoulder through fields. It is early spring the fields are empty. Willows… along the edges of the road. Willows bent hollow and deformed… and bare yet still with leaves. The boy walks and looks around. It is dark. In the sky there are stars. One of them is moving. It is a comet. A reddish flickering spark diagonally crossing the sky…
Good Nimue rejoiced. While I have no idea about who you were dreaming of I can pinpoint the date. The Red Comet was visible for only six days in the spring of the year of the Peace of Cintra. More specifically in the first days of March. In other dreams do you experience time stamps?
My dreams Condwiramurs snorted taking solace in her egg are not an agricultural calendar. They do not have dated subtitles. But for the record I also dreamed of the Battle of Brenna probably because I looked for a time at the canvas by Nicholas Certosy in your gallery. And the date for the Battle of Brenna is also known. It was also in the same year as the comet unless I am mistaken.
No you are not wrong. Was there something special about the dream of the battle?
No. A chaos of horses people and weapons. People screamed and killed. Someone surely a mad man shrieked – The Eagles! The Eagles!
What else? You said that there was a whole parade of dreams.
I do not remember… Condwiramurs paused.
Nimue smiled.
Well the adept said wincing hard preventing the Lady of the Lake from delivering any mocking comments. Yes sometimes I forget. Nobody is perfect. I repeat my dreams are visions not some organised shelves in a library…
I know Nimue said. We are not doing this to test your abilities as a dreamer we are analysing the legend. The riddles and blank spaces. It goes pretty well for us as in the first dream youve discovered who was the girl in the portrait: The double of Ciri who Vilgefortz attempted to deceive Emperor Emhyr…
She stopped because into the kitchen came the Fisher King. He bowed muttered and pulled out a loaf of bread a bottle and a package wrapped in cloth from the cupboard. Then he turned to leave not forgetting to bow and grunt.
He is lame Nimue said with ill-concealed sympathy. He was seriously wounded in a hunt with a wild boar which gored his leg. Thats why he spends so much time on the boat. With the oars and fishing he forgets about his injures. He is a very decent and good man. And I…
Condwiramurs remained politely silent.
I need a man said the little sorceress impartially.
I also thought the adept. The devil as soon as I return to the Academy Ill let someone seduce me. Celibacy is food but not for longer than one semester.
Nimue snorted.
If youve finished eating and dreaming lets go to the library.
Lets get back to your dream.
Nimue opened a folder and she turned and took out several sheets of sepia wash drawings. Condwiramurs immediately recognised the captured scene.
The audience at Loc Grim?
Of course. The double is present in the imperial palace. Emhyr pretending that he has been deceived and putting a good face on things. Here look the ambassadors of the Northern Kingdoms for whom his performance is played. And here we see the Nilfgaardian dukes. They feel humiliated the emperor has rejected their noble daughters and so despised their offers of alliances. They stand aside whispering planning revenge conspiracy murder. The double stands before the throne with her head bowed. The artist has done this to emphasize her mystique even her features are hidden under the veil on her face. This is basically everything we know about the false Ciri. No version of the legend mentions what happened to her later.
Its not hard to imagine Condwiramurs said sadly that fate was not kind to the girl. When Emhyr got the original and we all know that he acquired her he got rid of the forgery. In the dream I sensed no tragedy and in principle I should have felt something if… On the other hand what I see in dreams is not necessarily the real truth. As with any person my dreams reflect my desire longing… And fears.
I know.
The discussed until lunchtime looking through folders and bundles of prints. The fishing must have been good to the Fisher King because the lunch was grilled salmon. For dinner too.
That night Condwiramurs slept poorly. She had eaten too much.
She did not dream of anything. She was a little angry and embarrassed by it but Nimue showed no concern.
We have time she said. Before us are many more nights.
The tower of Inis Vitre had several bathrooms truly luxurious plush lined with marble and gleaming with brass and heated by pipes whose furnace was located somewhere in the basement. Condwiramurs could laze in the bath for hours but today she met Nimue in the sauna a small log cabin with a landing that went out into the lake. They sat together on a bench in the steam rising from red-hot stones washed down with water flicking themselves with birch brushes. Salty sweat ran down into their eyes.
If I understand correctly Condwiramurs wiped her face the end result of my experience on Inis Vitre should be to answer all the riddles and blank spaces in the legend of the Sorceress and the Witcher?
You are correct.
By day by examining images and discussions it should prepare me for the night when I have the power to dream about that event that is now completely forgotten and about what really happened? 
This time Nimue did not consider it necessary to confirm this. She got up and poured water from a bucket onto the stones. The hot steam took their breath away for a moment. The rest of the bucket of water Nimue poured on herself. Condwiramurs admired her figure. Though tiny the sorceress was built extraordinarily proportionately. The body and supple skin of the sorceress could be the envy of many a young girl. Condwiramurs was only twenty-four and she envied her.
But even if I dream of something she continued wiping her sweaty face again how can I be sure that what I dreamed was the true version? I certainly do not know…
Lets halt this discussion for a while cut off Nimue. We go out. Im already tired of sitting in this slow cooker. Lets refresh. And then well talk.
As it was part of the ritual. They ran out of the sauna their bare feet pattering on the boards of the landing and with a loud cry jumped into the cold water. Once they had dipped they swam to the landing and wrung out their hair.
The Fisher King alarmed by the splashing and yelling looked back from his boat he shaded his eyes with his hand then immediately turned around and devoted himself to his fishing tackle. Condwiramurs considered this behaviour offensive and reprehensible. Her opinion of the Fisher King had greatly increased when she noticed the time that he did not spend fishing he spent reading. He walked with a book even to the bathroom and it was nothing less than Speculum Aureum a work both profound and intellectually challenging. So if it was true that in her early days on Inis Vitre Condwiramurs was somewhat astonished by the inclinations of Nimue they had now stopped. It was clear that the Fisher King was an uncouth lout only in appearance. Apparently such behaviour was considered a secure mask.
Nevertheless thought Condwiramurs it is an unforgivable insult and an affront turning towards his rods and bait when there were two women parading naked with bodies worthy of nymphs from which the eyes should not be able to break away.
If I dream something she returned to the subject at hand as she wiped her breasts with a towel what guarantee do we have that it is the true version? I know all the literary versions of the legend from Dandelions Half a Century of Poetry to Andre Ravixs Lady of the Lake. I know all of Reverend Jarres various scientific treatises on the popular editions that I will not even mention. All of these readings have left a trace had an effect I am not able to eliminate this from my dreams. Is there a chance to break through the fiction to dream the truth?
There is.
How high?
The same as Nimue nodded towards the boat on the lake that which the Fisher King has. You see how he tirelessly checks his hooks. They anchor weeds roots submerged stumps trunks old shoes and the drowned-devil knows what else. But from time to time he catches something.
So happy fishing then Condwiramurs sighed and began to dress. Let us set the bait and start fishing. Look for the real version of the legend inside the upholstery and lining of an old trunk and hope to find a false bottom. And what if there is no false bottom? With all due respect Nimue but we are not the first in this fishery. What are the chances that some details escaped the attention of historians and the researchers who fished in front of us? Do we even have a minnow left?
They left Nimue said with conviction combing her hair Blank spaces filled with rhetoric and fabrications. Or wrapped in silence.
Like what?
For example the witchers winter stay in Toussaint. All versions of the legend dispose of this episode with a short sentence: The heroes spent the winter in Toussaint. Even Dandelion who devoted two chapters to his adventures in the Duchy is surprisingly enigmatic in terms of the witcher. Is it not worth it to find out what happened this winter? After escaping from Belhaven and meeting with the elf Avallach in the underground complex of Tir na Bea Arainne? After the skirmish in Caed Myrkvid and the adventure of the Druids? What did the witcher do in Toussaint from October through to January?
What did he do? Hibernated! Snorted the adept. Before the spring thaw he would not be able to cross the mountain passes and so he spent the winter bored. It is not surprising that later writers relieved this piece of boredom with a terse: Winter passed by. But if you need Ill try to dream something. Do we have a picture or a drawing?
Nimue smiled.
We have lots of pictures.
The rock painting represented a hunting scene. Lean casual strokes depicted little men carrying bows and spears hunting a large buffalo. The buffalo was purple striped like a tiger and above its curved horns hung something that resembled a dragonfly.
This Regis said nodding his head is the work of the elf Avallach. The elf that knew much.
Yes Geralt confirmed dryly. This is his painting.
The problem is that we have thoroughly explored the caves and there is no trace of either elves or any other creatures you mentioned.
They were here. Now they are hiding. Or gone.
This is an indisputable fact. Do not forget you were only awarded the audience through the intercession of the flaminica. Apparently it was concluded that one hearing was enough. After the flaminica categorically refused to cooperate I really do not know what else you can do. We have been wandering around these caves all day. Im afraid there is no point
Me too said the witcher bitterly. I cannot resist such an impression. Ive never understood the elves. But at least now I know why most human have no sympathy for elves. Because it is hard to shake the feeling that they are mocking us. In everything that they do what they say what they think elves make a mockery of us and scoff.
The anthropomorphism is speaking through you.
Maybe a little. But the impression remains.
What do we do?
Return to Caed Myrkvid to see Cahir who no doubt has had his scalp wound healed by the Druids. Then we get on the horses and take full advantage of the invitation of Countess Anna Henrietta. Do not look at me like that vampire Milva has broken ribs Cahir a broken head and rest in Toussaint will benefit both of them. And we will also have to remove Dandelion from the mess he has gotten into because I fear he has gotten into a good one.
Well sighed Regis. Have it your way. Ill have to avoid mirrors and dogs and will have to beware of sorcerers and telepaths… And if Im still exposed Im counting on you.
You can count on me Geralt said seriously. Im not in the habit of leaving a friend in need.
The vampire smiled and because they were alone he did not hide his fangs.
Friend?
The anthropomorphism speaks through my mouth. Come on lets get out of this cave my friend. Because here we will find only rheumatism.
Probably. Unless… Geralt? From what you saw the Elven necropolis of Tir na Bea Arainne is behind this wall. We could get there if… you know. If we broke through. Have you thought about this?
No. I had not thought of it.
The Fisher King had again prospered because there was lake trout for dinner again. The fish was so delicious that the lesson went out the window. Again Condwiramurs ate too much.
Condwiramurs belched. It is time to sleep she though when she caught herself for the second time mechanically turning the pages of a book without perceiving the content. It is time to dream.
She yawned and put down her book. She rearranged the pillows from a reading position to resting. With a spell she put out the lamp. The chamber was immediately plunged into darkness as thick as molasses. The heavy velour curtains were fully drawn. As the adept discovered it is best to dream in total darkness. What to choose? She thought stretching between the sheets. Go with the current and dream or try and anchor?
Despite their proud statements Dreamers did not remember half of their prophetic dreams a significant portion of them remained in the minds of the oneiromancers as gibberish images changing colours and shapes like a kaleidoscope - a childs toy with mirrors and glass. If the dreamlike visions were stripped of all pretence of order and meaning then they could safely ignore them. According to the rules: If I do not remember it it means it was not worth remembering. In the jargon of the dreamers these dreams are called lemons.
Worse and a somewhat embarrassing affair are ghost dreams from which the dreamer only remembers fragments and very short snippets of events after which the next morning one is left only a vague feeling of a message received. If the ghost is repeated several times it is certain that it is a dream which is important for some reason. Then the dreamer through concentration and autosuggestion tries to force the dream again this time a more specific ghost. The best methods are to force oneself to dream again immediately after waking up – called hooking. If the dream does not produce a hook they try and produce a vision during one of the following session by concentration and meditation prior to going to sleep.
Such pressure programming is called anchoring.
After twelve nights on the island Condwiramurs already had three lists of dreams. There was a list worthy of pride: a list of ghosts that she had hooked or anchored successfully. Among them there was the dream of the rebellion on the Island of Thanedd and the journey of the witcher and his companions in a blizzard in the pass of Malheur and the spring downpours softening the roads in the Sudduth valley. There was also a list that Nimue had recognised as a list of failures dreams that despite all their efforts remained an enigma. And there was also a working list a list of dreams waiting their turn.
And there was a dream strange but very nice that was coming back in bits and pieces in elusive sounds and silky touches.
A nice pleasant dream.
Well thought Condwiramurs closing her eyes. Let it be.
I think I know what the witcher did during the winter in Toussaint.
Well well Nimue looked over the edge of the leather-bound grimoire that she was reading. So you finally dreamed something?
Of course Condwiramurs said boastfully I dreamed! Of the Witcher Geralt and a woman with short black hair and green eyes. I do not know who it could be. Maybe this Countess Dandelion writes about in his memoirs?
You must not have read carefully the sorceress said somewhat coolly. Dandelion described Countess Anareitta in detail and all sources confirm that her hair was quote Chestnut coloured and truly shining like a halo of gold.
So it was not her admitted the adept. My woman had black hair. Like coal. And the dream was… hummm… interesting.
Im eagerly listening.
They were talking together. But it was not an ordinary conversation.
What was so strange?
Most of the time her legs where on his shoulders.
Tell me Geralt do you believe in love at first sight?
Do you?
I believe.
Now I know why we are together. Opposites attract.
Do not be cynical.
Why? Cynicism reportedly shows intelligence.
Thats not true. Cynicism for all its aura of pseudo intelligence is disgustingly hypocritical and insincere. While were at it… Tell me witcher what do you most love about me?
This.
You go from cynicism to triviality and banality. Try again.
What I most love about you is your reason your intelligence and inner depth your independence and freedom your…
I do not understand where you get so much sarcasm.
It was not sarcasm it was a joke.
I cannot stand such jokes. Especially at the wrong time. Everything my dear has its time and under the sky all are assigned their time. There is a time to be silent and a time to talk a time to weep and a time to laugh time to sow and a time to pick sorry collect a time for jokes and a time for seriousness…
A time to touch and a time to refrain?
Oh do not take it so seriously! Assume instead that it is a time for compliments. Loving without the compliments becomes just mindless activities to satisfy physical needs. Tell me compliments!
From the Buina to the Yaruga there is no one with such a beautiful ass as yours.
Now you go and compare me to barbaric rivers from the north that I do not know. Leaving aside the quality of your metaphor could you have not said from the Velda to the Alba? Or from the Alba to Sansretour?
Ive never been to the Alba. I try to avoid forms of flirting that I cannot back up with factual experience.
Oh really? So I guess that you have seen and experienced so many asses that you are able to judge? What white-haired one? How many women have you had before me? Well? I asked you a question witcher! Put away those hands you will not escape having to answer. How many women did you have before me?
None. Youre the first.
Finally!
Nimue had already spent a long time contemplating a picture that appeared in a subtle chiaroscuro of ten women sitting around a table.
Too bad we do not know that they really looked like. She said at last.
The great teachers? Condwiramurs snorted. There are dozens of portraits! Only in Aretuza itself…
I said: really. Interrupted Nimue. I did not mean embellished imaginations based on other embellished imaginations. Do not forget there was a time of destruction of the images of sorceresses. And the same of sorceresses. Then came the era of propaganda the teachers had to build up the appearance of respect admiration and reverent fear. Then from the reunion of the Lodge came oaths and convents pictures and paintings recording those present at the table were of ten wonderful and alluring women. But there are no authentic portraits. Except for two. The portrait of Margarita Laux-Antille which hangs in Aretuza on the island of Thanedd and was by a miracle saved from fire. And a picture of Sile de Tancarville in Ensenada in the palace of Lan Exeter.
And what of Francesca Findabairs image by an unknown elvish painter hanging in the gallery in Vengerberg?
A fake. When the Gate opened and the elves left they took with them or destroyed all their works of art and left not a single image. We do not know if the Daisy of the Valley was really as beautiful as they say. We do not know the appearance of Ida Emean. And the images of the Sorceresses of Nilfgaard were destroyed thoroughly and systematically we have no idea of the true appearance of Assire car Anahid or Fringilla Vigo.
Let us assume sighed Condwiramurs that they looked as they were later portrayed. Dignified noble good wise honest and generous. And beautiful dazzlingly beautiful… Let us assume that. Then it is somehow easier to live.
The daily tasks on Inis Vitre gradually fell into a dull routine. The analysis of dreams started after breakfast and usually lasted until noon. Before lunch Condwiramurs went for a walk but walks soon became boring. No wonder; in an hour it was possible to circle the island twice and look at things as interesting as rocks dwarf pines sand clams and sea gulls.
After lunch and a long nap they began discussions reviewing books scrolls and manuscripts viewing pictures images and maps. And long protracted disputes in the evenings on the relationship between legend and truth.
And then at night came the dreams. Different dreams. Celibacy began to be noticed.
Instead of dreams of the enigma of the legend of the witcher Condwiramurs dreamed of the Fisher King in a variety of situations from the non-erotic to the extremely erotic. In the extremely non-erotic dreams the Fisher King dragged her behind the boat tied to a rope. He rowed slowly and lazily so she sank into the lake swallowing water and she felt a terrible fear because she felt something rising from the bottom something huge and hungry something that wanted to swallow the bait which she was. When it seemed the something was about to catch her the Fisher King pulled powerfully on the oars the rope tighten and she was pulled away from the jaws of the unseen predator. She felt like she couldnt breathe then she awoke.
In her undoubtedly erotic dreams she was kneeling on the rickety boat clinging to the rail and the Fisher King held her around the neck from behind as he fucked her enthusiastically grunting spitting and growling the whole time. Apart from the physical pleasure Condwiramurs felt an apprehension that chilled her bowels: what if Nimue caught them? Suddenly in the water of the lake she saw the wobbling threatening face of the little sorceress… she woke up drenched in sweat.
She got up opened the window and felt the cool night air and saw the moonlight falling on the mist from the lake.
And then she dreamed on.
The tower of Inis Vitre had a balcony that overlooked the lake. At first Condwiramurs paid it no attention but over time she had reason to ponder. The balcony was special because it was inaccessible. It was impossible to get to it from any room she knew.
Aware that the home of the sorceress cannot part with such a secret anomaly Condwiramurs did not ask questions. Even when taking a stroll around the lake she saw Nimue watching. Apparently in was only inaccessible to those unauthorised and uninvited.
She was a little angry because it was considered rude but pretended that she did not see anything.
But it did not take too long before the mystery was solved.
It was after a series of dreams caused by Wilma Wesselys watercolours. The author was apparently fascinated by the adventures of Ciri and the Tower of Swallows because all of her works had been devoted to them.
Ive had weird dreams she complained one morning. …I dream images. Not scenes no scenes but pictures. Ciri and a tower… A still picture.
And nothing more? Nothing except the visual experience?
Nimue of course knew that a capable dreamer like Condwiramurs used all her senses she doesnt just receive the dream through her eyes like most people but also through hearing touch smell – and even taste.
Nothing said the adept. Just…
Well?
A thought. A stubborn thought. In this tower Im not a lady but a prisoner.
Come with me.
As Condwiramurs had guessed access to the balcony was only possible going through the private chambers of the sorceress. Clean rooms that were meticulously neat and fragrant; smelling of sandalwood myrrh lavender and mothballs. It was necessary to use a small secret door and a spiral staircase leading down. Then they came to where they had to go.
The chamber in contrast to the other rooms did not have wood panelling on the walls or tapestries it was only whitewashed so it was very light. Even more clear light because there was a huge triple window or rather a glass door which led directly to the balcony overhanging the lake.
The only furniture in the room were two chairs a huge oval framed mirror and a sort of mahogany stand with a horizontal framework where a tapestry had been hung. The tapestry measured about five feet seven and reached its fringes to the floor.
The tapestry showed a rocky bluff overlooking a mountain lake. A castle was embedded in the cliff that seemed to be part of the stone wall. Condwiramurs knew the castle well she had seen it in many illustrations.
Vilgefortzs citadel where he imprisoned Yennefer. Where the legend ended.
Yes Nimue said apparently indifferent. That is where the legend ended at least in the traditional versions. We know these versions so it seems to us that this is the ending. Ciri escaped from the Tower of Swallows where as you dreamed she was being held as a prisoner. When she realised what they wanted to do she ran away. The legend gives many versions of this escape…
I interrupted the adept liked the best version where the objects are thrown behind her. A comb an apple and a handkerchief. But…
Condwiramurs.
Im sorry.
As I said there are many versions of the flight. But it still remains unclear how Ciri went directly from the Tower of Swallows to Vilgefortzs castle. If you cannot dream of the Tower of Swallows then try and dream of the castle. Look carefully at the tapestry… Are you listening?
This mirror… Its magic right?
No. I squeeze pimples in front of it.
Sorry.
It is a mirror of Hartmann Nimue said seeing the adepts wrinkled nose and angry gesture. You may want to look. But be careful please.
Is it true Condwiramurs asked her voice trembling with excitement that with a mirror of Hartmann you can move to other…
Worlds? It is. But not immediately not without long preparation exercise meditation and many other things. When I urged caution I was thinking of something else.
What?
The mirror of Hartmann works in both directions. It is always possible someone or something may come out.
Do you know Nimue… When I look at the tapestry…
Did you dream last night?
I dreamed. But strangely. A birds eye view. I was a bird… I saw the castle from outside. I could not get inside something was guarding the entrance.
Look at the tapestry Nimue ordered. Look at the citadel. Look carefully focus your attention to every detail. Concentrate hard record this image in your memory. I want you if you can get there in the dream to go inside. It is important that you enter.
Outside beyond the castle walls raged a blizzard but inside fuelled by thick logs a fire blazed. Yennefer revelled in the warmth. Her current cell was indeed better than the wet cell in which she had spent the last two months but even so her teeth chattered with the cold.
While imprisoned she had lost track of time they were in no hurry to inform her of the date but she was certain it was winter in December maybe January.
Eat Yennefer Vilgefortz said. Do not hesitate.
The sorceress did not allow for embarrassment or accident. She ate slowly only because her barely healed fingers were stiff and awkward and it was difficult to hold the cutlery. And she would not eat with her hands she was eager to show her superiority to Vilgefortz and the rest of the guests of the sorcerer. She knew none of them.
It is with great regret I must inform you said Vilgefortz his fingers caressing the stem of his cup that Ciri your ward has departed from this world. You can only blame yourself Yennefer. And your foolish stubbornness.
One of the guests a short man with dark hair sneezed loudly wiping snot on a cambric handkerchief. His nose was red swollen and undeniably congested.
To your health Yennefer said not upset at all by Vilgefortzs angry words. How did you come by such a terrible cold noble sir? Did you stand in a draft after a bath?
Another guest an older taller thin man with unnaturally pale eyes laughed. The man with the cold though his face flushed with anger thanked the sorceress with a short bow and a short nasal response. It was not short enough to hide the Nilfgaardian accent.
Vilgefortz turned to face her. He no longer wore on his head the golden structure or the glass lens over his eye socket but it looked even worse than in the summer when she saw him maimed for the first time. The left eyeball had regenerated sufficiently but was much smaller than the right. The appearance was breath-taking.
You Yennefer he drawled probably think Im lying to deceive you. Why would I? The report of the girls death has crushed me like you if not more. After all I had far-reaching plans for her which would decide about my future. Ciri is dead and now my plans have collapsed.
Good Yennefer barely keeping the knife in her fingers clumsily cut into her second course of stuffed pork chop.
On the contrary continued the sorcerer to you Ciri was only a silly sentiment consisting of equal parts of the penalty of your infertility and your guilt. Yes yes Yennefer a sentiment of guilt! After you had actively participated in genetic experiments by which Ciri came into the world. Incidentally the experiment failed because the experimenters lacked knowledge.
Yennefer saluted him in silence praying that the cup would not slip from her fingers. She slowly came to the conclusion that at least two of them would be stiff for a long time. Maybe permanently.
Vilgefortz snorted at her gesture.
Its too late he said through gritted teeth you have to know Yennefer I have enough knowledge. And if I had this girl I would use this knowledge. In fact you have nothing to regret even though you are dry and barren as a desert I wanted to strengthen the weak maternal instinct and give you not only a daughter but even a grandchild. Or at least an ersatz grandchild.
Yennefer snorted dismissively although inside she was boiling with rage.
Im sorry to spoil your good humour my dear said the wizard coldly. Because I have the sad news that the witcher Geralt of Rivia is also dead. Yes Yes the same witcher Geralt with whom as with Ciri you associated your surrogate feelings foolish embarrassing and nauseating to the stomach. Know Yennefer that our dear friend the witcher said goodbye to the world in a truly fiery spectacular. On this occasion you should not have any remorse. For the witchers death you are not guilty to even the smallest degree. All the credit belongs to me. Taste the candied pears they are really delicious.
Yennefers violet eyes blazed with hatred.
Vilgefortz laughed.
Such is your will he said Indeed if not for your dimeritium bracelets your eyes would have burned me to ashes. But since the dimeritium is working you cannot burn me only look.
The man with the cold sneezed blew his nose and coughed until there were tears in his eyes. The tall man looked at her with his unpleasant fish eyes.
And where is Mister Rience? Yennefer asked emphasizing the words. Mister Rience who has promised to do so much to me. And where is Mister Schirru who never failed to hit or kick me? And why does my guard who until recently were violent and vulgar brutes started to behave in timid reverence? No do not answer Vilgefortz. I think I know. What you told me is a lie. You have lost Ciri and Geralt escaped while organising a bloodbath for your minions. Now what? Your plans have collapsed turned to dust and you yourself have recognised that your dreams of power have faded like smoke. And the sorceresses and Dijkstra draw closer and closer. It is not without reason and not out of pity that you have stopped torturing me. And Emperor Emhyr tightens his network and this is turning out to be very very bad. Ess a tearth me tiarn? Apleine a cales ellea?
I understand elder speech said the Nilfgaardian with the cold. And my name is Stefan Skellen. And I do not have full pants. Rather I believe I am in a considerably better situation that you Lady Yennefer.
After the speech he took a breath coughed again and blew his nose into his soaked handkerchief. Vilgefortz slapped the table with his opened hand.
No more games Vilgefortz said rolling his miniature macabre eye. Know Yennefer that you are no longer needed by me. In fact I should put you in a sack and drown you in the lake but I tend to draw on such methods with the greatest distaste. Until such a time that circumstances permit me or force me to another decision you will remain isolated. But I warn you – dont cause me any problems. If you try to go on a hunger strike again I will no longer waste time trying to feed you through a tube. I will simply let you starve. And if you try and escape the guards orders are clear. And now farewell. Unless you havent satisfied yourself…
No Yennefer stood up and crumpled her napkin on the table. Maybe it was something I ate but the company has taken away my appetite. Goodbye gentlemen.
Stefan Skellen sneezed and coughed. The tall man with the pale eyes measured her with anger and a sinister smile. Vilgefortz looked away.
As usual when being led from cell to cell Yennefer tried to figure out where she was to get some scrap of information that could help her plan her escape. And as usual she was disappointed the corridors down which she was led had no windows so there was no chance to see the surrounding countryside or at the least the sun in order to determine the cardinal points.
Telepathy was prevented by the two heavy bracelets and a hoop around her neck all of dimeritium which effectively blocked any attempt to use magic.
The chamber in which she was imprisoned was as cold and bleak as a hermits hut.
Yennefer remembered however how happy she was when they had moved her here from the dungeon. From the basement in whose bottom there was always a stinking pool of water and the walls dripped with nitrate and salt. The basement where they fed her leftovers which the rats tore from her mangled fingers effortlessly.
When after about two months he removed the chain took her from there and allowed her to change clothes and bathe Yennefer was beside herself with joy. He took her to a small room which seemed to be the bedroom of a king and the slurry that was served birds nest soup worth of an emperors table. Then things cleared. After a while the soup became a nasty slop the bed a hard cot and the room a prison. A narrow cold prison in which in just four steps you would come to the other wall.
Yennefer cursed sighed and sat on the stool that was apart from the cot the only piece of furniture she had.
He came in so quiet that she almost didnt hear him.
My name is Bonhart he said. It would be nice that you remember this name witch. That you engrave it in your memory.
Go fuck yourself pig.
I am a bounty hunter he growled. Three months ago in September I caught your little bastard in Ebbing – the famous Ciri which you were talking about.
Yennefer listened carefully. September. Ebbing. Caught her… But she isnt here. Maybe he is lying?
The ashen-haired witcher was trained at Kaer Morhen. I told her to fight in an arena to kill people while people in the audience screamed. Slowly slowly I turned her more into a beast. I taught her this role with whip fist and boot. She learned for a long time. But then she escaped me the green-eyed snake.
Yennefer imperceptibly sighed with relief.
She escaped into another world. But we will meet again Im sure of it. You know witch the only thing I regret is that your lover the witcher Geralt was burned at the stake. I wanted to give him a taste of my blade damn mutant.
Yennefer snorted.
Listen Bonhart or whatever your name is. Do not make me laugh. The witcher was not brought up to heel. You cannot compare with him. You can only hunt puppies. Only small dogs.
Look here witch.
With a sharp movement he parted his shirt and pulled out a chain with three silver medallions hanging from it. One had the shape of a cats head the other an eagle or a griffin.
The third she did not see exactly but she thought it was a wolf.
Such trinkets she said feigning indifference you can buy at any fair.
These are not from a fair.
Whatever you say.
It was once so hissed Bonhart that good people were afraid of the witchers more than the monsters. Monsters after all sat in the woods and caves however witchers had the nerve to walk the streets enter taverns and hover near shrines temples schools and playgrounds. Decent people were offended so they started looking for someone who could bring the insolent witchers to order. They found someone. Not easily or soon not even close. But they found someone. You see I have killed three. Not another mutant appeared in the area to upset the honest citizens. And if he appeared I do to him what I did to the previous ones.
Really Yennefer said with a crossbow from around a corner? Or by poisoning?
Bonhart put the medallions back under his shirt and took a step towards her.
You insult me witch.
Thats what I wanted.
Oh really? Now I will show you witch that I can compete with your Witcher lover in any field and even be better than him.
The guards standing at the door jumped upon hearing the crash bang howling and whimpering from the cell. And if the guards had ever happened in their life to hear a panther caught in trap they would have sworn that the cell held a panther.
Then the guards heard from the cell a terrible roar like a wounded lion which they had also never heard on watch and only ever seen on their coat of arms. They looked at each other. Shook their heads and entered.
Yennefer sat in the corner of the room among the remains of the stool. Her hair was dishevelled her dress and shirt torn from top to bottom her breasts rose sharply with her heavy breathing. Blood flowed from her nose a bruise was quickly growing on her face and there were scratches on her right arm.
Bonhart was sitting in the other corner of the room among bits of stool holding his head in both hands. He too was bleeding from his nose the blood colouring his moustache a deep crimson. His face was marked by bloody grooves. Yennefers barely healed fingers were a pitiful weapon but the dimeritium bracelets had some wonderfully sharp edges.
In Bonharts cheek neatly along the cheek bone embedded deeply was a fork which Yennefer had silently stolen at dinner.
Only small dogs the sorceress gasped trying to cover her breasts with the remains of her dress And stay away from the dogs you are too weak for them bastard.
She could not forgive herself for not getting him where she was aiming – his eye. But the target was moving and besides no one is perfect.
Bonhart grunted stood up grabbed the fork and roared and reeled with pain. He swore horribly.
Meanwhile two more guards had entered the room.
Hey you! Bonhart roared wiping blood from his face. Come here! Hold this whore on the floor stretch open her legs and hold her!
The guards looked at each other then at the ceiling.
Youd better leave sir said one. There will be no hold or stretching here. It is not our job.
Besides added the second in a whisper we do not want to end up like Rience and Schirru.
Condwiramurs put down the paper which had an image of a prison cell. In the cell was a woman sitting with her head down shackled and chained to a stone wall.
They imprisoned her she muttered. While the witcher was in Toussaint with some dark haired lady.
Are you condemning him? Nimue asked sharply. Without knowing practically anything?
No. Im not condemning him but…
No buts about it. Be quiet please.
For some time they sat there silently and flipped through prints in a folder.
All the versions of the legend Condwiramurs identified one of the images give this place as the end the decisive clash between Good and Evil the castle of Rhys-Rhun. All versions. Except for one.
Except for one Nimue nodded. Apart from the little known anonymously authored version called The Black Book of Ellander.
The Black Book states that the end of the legend took place in Stygga castle.
Correct. Some of the events presented in the book differ considerably from the canon.
I wonder the adept raised her head which of the two castles is in the picture? Which castle is on your tapestry? Which image is real?
We will probably never know. The castle where the legend ends was destroyed and there remains no trace of it which is confirmed by all versions of the legend including the Book of Ellander. None of the proposed locations are convincing. We do not know and will probably never learn what the castle looked like and where it stood.
But the truth…
The historical truth is of no importance Nimue sharply interrupted. Remember that we do not know what Ciri really looked like. But here in this picture drawn by Wilma Wessely in a violent conversation with Avallach set against the background of macabre statues of children is Ciri. There is no doubt.
But Condwiramurs did not give up your tapestry…
Shows the castle where the legend ended.
There was a long silence. The rustling of pictures being turned.
I do not like Condwiramurs spoke the version of the legend in the Black Book. It is so… so…
Frighteningly realistic Nimue finished shaking her head.
Condwiramurs yawned and put down the book Half a Century of Poetry the supplemented edition with the afterword by Professor Everett Denhoff Junior. She changed the position of the scattered cushions in the configuration for sleeping. She yawned stretched and turned off the lamp. The chamber was drowned in darkness brightened only by slivers of moonlight coming through the gap in the curtains. What to choose for this night she thought squirming between the sheets. Leave it to chance? Or try and anchor?
After a moment she decided on the latter.
There was a vague recurring dream that she could not remember the end of it got lost and disappeared among other dreams like a thread that gets woven among the colourful patterns in a fabric. A dream that escaped her memory although it was stubbornly there.
She fell asleep instantly. As soon as she closed her eyes the dream came.
There was a cloudless night sky with a moon and stars. On the slopes of a snow-dusted hill she saw vineyards. The black angular outline of buildings with jagged walls and corner towers. There were two riders. Both entered the empty courtyard both dismounted both headed for the portal. However into the dark hole only one entered.
The one with white hair.
Condwiramurs moaned in her sleep she thrashed on the bed.
The white-haired one followed stairs that went deep deep underground. Walking down dark corridors he pauses at regular intervals lighting torches in their iron brackets. Shadows dance on the walls and ceiling.
More halls stairs another corridor. A room a domed cellar which had barrels along the walls.
Rubble a heap of bricks. Then the corridor forks. In both forks there is darkness. The white-haired one lights another torch. He pulls a sword from the sheath on his back. He hesitates he doesnt know which fork to follow. Finally he decides on the right. It is very dark and twisted full of debris.
Condwiramurs moaned in her sleep a mortal fear seizes her. She knows that the path that the white-haired one has chosen leads into danger. But at the same time she knows that the white-haired one is looking for danger.
Because it is his profession.
The adept stirs between the sheets moaning. She is a dreamer the dreamer is in a oneiromanic trance suddenly she is able to predict what will happen in a moment.
Watch out she wants to scream but she knows that she will not be able to shout. Watch out watch out!
Be careful witcher!
The monster attacked in the dark from behind silently with malignancy. It materialised suddenly from the darkness like a fire that explodes. Like a tongue of flame.
At dawn of day when falcon shakes his wing
Mainly from pleasure and from noble usage
Blackbirds too shake theirs then as they sing
Receiving their mates mingling their plumage
O as the desires it lights in me now rage
Id offer you joyously what befits a lover.
See how Love had written this very page:
Even for this end are we come together.
Francois Villon
Although he was in a hurry and pushed himself hard and did not rest the witcher stayed in Toussaint almost the entire winter. What were his reasons? I will not write about it. It happened and that is enough there is no reason to go breaking my head. To those who would condemn the witcher remember that love has many names judge not lest ye be judged.
Dandelion
Half a Century of Poetry
Those were the days of good hunting and good sleeping.
Rudyard Kipling
CHAPTER THREE
The monster attacked from the darkness from its hiding place quietly and with premeditation. It materialised suddenly from the darkness like a fiery explosion. Like a tongue of flame.
Geralt though surprised reacted instinctively. He dodged to the side brushing up against the wall of the dungeon. The beast flew by and bounced from the stone wall like a ball waved it wings and jumped again hissing and opening its horrible beak.
But this time the witcher was prepared.
He struck with a short attack from the elbow aiming at the throat the red flap of the gizzards. He succeeded. He felt the blade penetrate the body. The momentum of the blow knocked the monster onto the floor near the wall. The skoffin howled with a cry that almost sounded human. It threw itself among the broken bricks flapping its wings spewing blood and thrashing its tail around like a whip. The witcher was sure the fight was over but the nasty monster gave him an unpleasant surprise. It unexpectedly launched at his throat screeching showing its claws and snapping its beak. Geralt jumped bouncing his shoulder against the wall and launched a blow from below using the momentum of the bounce. He was successful. The skoffin fell once more between the bricks its fetid blood spilled down the dungeon wall forming a fanciful pattern. The monster shook screeched and stretched its long neck its throat swelled and shook. The blood flowed rapidly from it and disappeared among the bricks where it lay.
Geralt could easily finish it off but he did not want to destroy the skin. He waited calmly until the skoffin bled to death. He moved a few steps away undid his pants and took a piss while whistling a nostalgic tune.
The skoffin was silent and still. The witcher moved closer to it and nudged it carefully and gently with the tip of his sword. Seeing that it was over he grabbed the monster by the tail and held it up. He held the base of the tail at the height of a humans waist; the skoffins sharp beak reached the ground. Its wing span was just over four feet.
Youre not particularly heavy Geralt shook the monster that weighed no more than a fattened turkey. Fortunately for me I get paid per piece not by weight.
Wow Reynart de Bois-Fresnes whistled through his teeth which for him Geralt knew meant the highest expression of astonishment and admiration. This is the first time I have seen something like this with my own eyes. A true monster on my honour. So this is the dreaded basilisk?
No Geralt lifted the monster a little higher so the knight would see better. It is not a basilisk. It is a cockatrice.
So what is the difference?
The essentials. The basilisk is also known as the regulus is a reptile. The cockatrice also called a skoffin is an ornithosaur – that is half reptile half bird. It is the only representative of the subclass which scientist call Ornithoreptilia and after long disputes they came to the conclusion that…
And which of the two Reynart de Bois-Fresnes interrupted apparently without interest of the discussions of scientists can kill or turn a man to stone with a glance?
None. Those are stories.
Then why are people so afraid? This thing here isnt so large. Can it be so dangerous?
This thing here Geralt shook the dead monster usually attacks from behind and without error goes perfectly between the vertebrae or the aorta or under the left kidney. Usually all it takes is a single thrust of its beak. With regards to the basilisk it will kill you no matter where it bites; it has the strongest know poison which is a neurotoxin that kills within a few moments.
Brrr… Tell me which one can you kill with a mirror?
All of them. If you slam it hard enough in the head with the mirror.
Reynart de Bois-Fresnes burst out laughing. Geralt did not laugh the joke about the basilisk and the mirror was one the teachers in Kaer Morhen repeated often. Equally funny were the jokes about virgins and unicorns. There was also a story of foolishness about a young witcher from Kaer Morhen who made a bet to shake hands with a dragon.
He smiled. Memories.
I prefer it when you smile Reynart said watching him carefully. Like you are at this moment. Not like back in October when we first met in the Druidic woods. Back then you were gloomy bitter and resentful at the world like a moneylender who had been cheated and on top of that like a man who throughout the night has come to nothing. Even in the morning.
Really I was like that?
Really. So do not be surprised that I prefer you such as you are now. Changed.
Therapy through work Geralt again shook the cockatrice he held by the tail. The beneficial effects of exercise on mental health. And to continue the therapy Ill get straight to business. The skoffin can earn more than the agreed upon price for capture. There is little damage to it so you could take it to a taxidermist for stuffing but do not take less than two hundred for it. If you have to sell it in pieces remember that the most valuable feathers are those above the tail especially these the central rudders. They are far softer than those of a goose and write very nicely and cleanly with little wear. An experienced scribe will not hesitate to give you five per pen.
I have clients to collect the body the knight smiled. The Guild of Coopers. They saw in Castel Ravello that stuffed ugly thing that monster or whatever you call it… That you the day after Saovine went into the basement and killed.
I remember.
Now the Coopers had seen that stuffed ugly bitch and asked me about obtaining a similar rarity to decorate their guild hall. In Toussaint the Coopers cannot complain about a lack of work and as a result they are prosperous so they will not think much if we charge two hundred and twenty for the cockatrice. Maybe even a bit more if we try to haggle. In regards to the feathers… They are not going to know if we took some feathers from the things ass to sell to the county chancery. The chancery does not pay out of pocket but the county will pay cash without haggling not five but ten per pen.
I bow to your cunning.
Nomen omen Reynart de Bois-Fresnes smile broadened. My mum must have known something baptising me after the sly fox from the nursery rhyme.
You should be a businessman not a knight.
I should agreed the knight. But if you are born the son of a knight you will die the son of a knight and will sire another knight. And it does not change even if you are broke. You know how to count Geralt and the culture of the market.
No not culture. For similar reasons as yours. With the sole difference that I wont be siring anything. Lets get out of these dungeons.
Outside beneath the walls of the castle the frost stung and the wind blew from the mountains. The night was a clear and cloudless sky full of stars and the moonlight sparkled on the fresh snow.
The waiting horses snorted in welcome.
We could go directly to my customer and make a deal said the knight. But you probably need to get to Beauclair huh? To a certain bedroom?
Geralt did not answer because he did not respond to such questions on principle. He tied the cockatrice onto the back of his horse then mounted Roach.
We will visit the customer he said. The night is still young and Im hungry. I would also like to drink something. Lets go to town. To Pheasantry.
The knight laughed and adjusted the red and gold chequered shield hanging on the high saddle so he could scramble up.
As you wish my friend. We go to Pheasantry. Forward mount.
They went down the slope to the road lined by a row of poplars.
You know what Reynart Geralt suddenly said. I like you as you are now. Speaking normally. Back when we first met you used annoying moronic mannerisms.
Upon my honour witcher I am a knight-errant chortled the Reynart de Bois-Fresnes. Have you forgotten? Knights always talk like morons. It is as much a part of their character as this shield here. Thanks to the speech and the coat of arms we know who belongs to the brotherhood.
On my honour said the Checkerboard Knight you are unnecessarily troubled Sir Geralt. Your companions have certainly returned to health and their injuries forgotten. The Duchess has palace doctors in profusion able to cure every disease. On my honour there is more to discuss.
I am of the same opinion. Said Regis. Lighten up Geralt. After all the Druidess healed Milva…
And the Druidess is familiar with treatments Cahir interjected. The best example is my own head. Look it is as good as new. Milva is certainly healthy already; there is no reason for concern.
I hope so.
Healthy already repeated the Knight I bet that when we return we will find her dancing at all the balls! Feasting! In Beauclair at the court of the Duchess Anarietta there is always continuous dancing and feasting. Ha ha on my honour now that I have fulfilled my knightly vow I am…
You have completed your vow?
I was in the favour of Fortune! I would like to explain that I made an oath. And not just any oath but on the heron. In Spring. I vowed to apprehend five hundred malefactors before Yule. I have completed this so I am relieved. I can once again drink and eat beef. And I do not have to hide my name. Let me introduce myself. I am Reynart de Bois-Fresnes.
A pleasure to meet you.
You were talking of balls? Angoulême said urging her horse up next to them. I hope that there will be enough food and drink for us. And I would gladly dance!
On my honour at the court of Duchess Anna Henrietta there will be plenty of both said Reynart de Bois-Fresnes. Singing and feasting and performances by jugglers theatre music dancing and poetry in the evenings. Youre friends of Dandelion… I mean the Viscount Julian. And he is very dear to Her Belovedness Our Lady Duchess.
And how long he boasted! Angoulême said. Was there truly an affair with them both? Do you know the story Sir Knight? Tell us!
Angoulême said the witcher. Do you need to know?
I do not need to. But I want to! Leave off the protesting Geralt. And stop looking so annoyed otherwise the mushroom pickers will have nothing to do because the sight of your mouth will spoil the mushrooms on the roadside. And you Sir Knight tell me.
The other errant knights who rode at the head of the procession sang a song with a repeated refrain. The words of the song were almost unbelievably stupid.
It happened began the knight six years ago. The poet was a guest at the court during the winter and spring playing his lute singing romances and declaiming poems. Prince Rajmund was at the time in Cintra for the congress. He was in no hurry to get back home; there was no secret that he kept a courtesan in Cintra. The Duchess Anarietta and Mister Dandelion… Well Beauclair is a special magical place where love works like a powerful spell on people… Im sure youll notice this. The Duchess got to know the troubadour. Maybe they did not even know it was happening – the poems compliments flowers words glances and sighs… To cut a story short they both became too close.
How close? Laughed Angoulême.
I was not an eyewitness the knight said stiffly. And it is not suitable to pass on gossip. Moreover you should know at your age my dear that love has many names ultimately men can be attracted to women body to body.
Cahir snorted softly. Angoulême had nothing to add.
They met in secret for about two months continued Reynart de Bois-Fresnes. From Belleteyn in midsummer. Over time however they forgot prudence. Rumours spread and vicious talk of them did not leave them alone. Mister Dandelion did not stay and hurriedly left the principality. It soon became clear how wise that was. For barely had he left before Prince Rajmund returned from Cintra and a servant told him everything. The Prince when he had heard of the insult that had been made against him as you can imagine fell into a severe rage. He threw his bowl of soup on the table slit the informers throat with a knife and roared words of little decency. Then he hit the Marshal in the face and broke his teeth and then in front of witnesses broke a wonderful mirror from Kovir into pieces. The Duchess was sent under arrest to her quarters and was threatened with torture to extract what had happened. After that he commanded that his soldiers pursue Mister Dandelion and to kill him without mercy and cut his heart out of his chest. Inspired by some old ballads he had thoughts to fry the heart and force Duchess Anarietta to eat the heart in front of the whole court. Ugh disgusting! Thankfully Mister Dandelion managed to disappear over the border in time.
Thankfully. Then the prince died?
He died. The incident as I was told brought his blood to the boil it is said that he had apoplexy and became paralysed. He lay for nearly half a year like a log. But then he was fine. He stood on his feet again and walked. But with squinty eyes like…
The Knight turned in his saddle screwed up his eyes and grimaced like a monkey.
While Prince Rajmund he continued had always been renowned as a womanizer with the squint he became even greater at fornicating because every woman was thinking that he was winking in a sign of love for her. And quite a few females enjoyed the princes attention. I am not saying that all the weaker sex in Toussaint are greedy with loose morals but as the prince winked almost eternally the majority of those women came out on top. But in the end trying to keep up with all this mischief one night the apoplexy stuck him again. He breathed his last. In the bedroom.
On top of a girl? Laughed Angoulême.
Indeed the normal serious Knight smiled behind his moustache. In truth he was beneath her. But there is no need to go into details.
It stands to reason that you do not Cahir said seriously. Though I think there wasnt a lot of mourning for Prince Rajmund? During your story I got the impression…
That the unfaithful wife will be more loved that the cheating husband interrupted the vampire in his usual way. Which is perhaps why she rules now?
That is one reason why Reynart de Bois-Fresnes answered with a disarming sincerity. But not only that. Prince Rajmund to put it mildly was dishonest a villain and forgive me a motherfucker that would cause the devil himself an ulcer in six months. And Toussaint suffered under his rule for seven years. But Duchess Anareitta is adored by the people.
So we do not have to worry Geralt asked sourly that the deceased Prince Rajmund left anyone who would honour him by putting a dagger into our friend Dandelion?
You do not have to worry the Knight looked at him understandingly. On my honour nothing will happen to him. As I told you Our Lady is devoted to the poet and Anarietta would make mincemeat out of anyone who tried to harm him.
The good knight returns
When the war is over
Not expecting his beloved
Has now been married
Hey ho ho
Thats the knights fate.
Alarmed by the knights singing a flock of screaming crows took flight from the trees lining the roadside.
Soon they left the forest into a wide valley between the hills on which the towers of a palace shone white against the blue sky. As far as the eye could see the gentle hills were covered in neatly trimmed hedges and bushes. The ground beneath the bushes was lined with red and yellow leaves.
What is that? Angoulême asked. Grapevines?
Grapevines confirmed Reynart de Bois-Fresnes. The famous valley of Sansretour. The worlds most excellent wine is made from the grapes that grow here.
True said Regis who as usual knew everything. Due to the volcanic soil here and the local microclimate that provides the ideal amount of sunny days with annual precipitation. If we add to this tradition the knowledge and care from the workers of the vineyard the resulting product is a superior quality brand.
Well put the Knight smiled. Quality and brand. Oh look for example on the slopes below the palace in this region we give names to the wines and vineyards. This is called the Castel Ravello and its wines come from vineyards such as Erveluce the Fiorano the famous Pomino and Est Est. Surely you have heard of it. A barrel of Est Est wine is tenfold as much as you would pay for a barrel from the Cidaris vineyard of Alba. And there oh look you can see other castles and vineyards but the names will probably be too foreign to you – Vermentino Toricella Casteldaccia Tufo Sancerre Nuragus Coronata and finally Corvo Bianco which the elves call Gwyn Cerbin. I take it these names are foreign to you?
Foreign ha! Said Angoulême. You especially need the knowledge so that a rogue innkeeper does not pour one of these wines and not ordinary plonk otherwise more than once I would have had to leave my horse as a pledge of what Est Est wine would cost. This stuff might be great for lords but we the ordinary people the cheaper the better. And I can tell you this for Ive experienced both – puking is the same whether youve had Est Est wine or cheap wine.
Dont judge us on our cheap wines Angoulême Reynart said sitting at a bench behind a table. Well bring you a quality brand and a good year. We can afford to weve earned it. We can treat ourselves to our hearts content.
Of course Geralt said waving to the innkeeper. Dandelion sometimes says that there are other motivations for making money but can never recall what. I want to taste what is making those tempting smells from the kitchen. Anyway I did not expect at this late hour Pheasantry would have this many guests.
But today is the feast of Yule said the innkeeper who had heard his words. People are celebrating. Having fun. Having fortunes read. According to tradition…
I know the witcher interrupted. And in the kitchen what tradition are you preparing today?
Smoked tongue and horseradish. Capon broth with meatballs. Roast meat dumplings and sauerkraut…
Bring it quickly my good man. And for… What do we ask for Reynart?
With meat thought the Knight Well have a red Cote de Blessure. The year that the old Countess Caroberta kicked the bucket.
A wonderful choice the innkeeper nodded. At your service gentlemen.
A spring of mistletoe thrown over the shoulder of one of the girls at a neighbouring table fell into Geralts lap. The celebrating company laughed and the girl blushed prettily.
None of that the Knight threw the spring back. This is not your chosen one. He is already busy gracious lady. He is already captivated by certain green eyes…
Shut up Reynart!
The innkeeper brought the ordered food and drink and then they ate and drank in silence watching the surrounding festivities.
Yule Geralt said thoughtfully placing his cup on the table. Midinvaerne. The winter solstice. Im stuck here for two months. Two months lost.
One month Reynart corrected him soberly. If you lose anything then it is only one month. The snow will cover the mountain passes and you will not be able to leave Toussaint. You will have to stay here during Yule and probably until spring because it will be in vain to waste tears on force majeure. In any case do not go overboard with the sadness and grief. I do not believe that they are sorry for you.
What do you know Reynart? What do you know?
Not much replied the Knight pouring. Not much more than what I see. And I saw your first meeting you and her. In Beauclair. Remember the festival of the vat? The white underwear?
Geralt did not answer. Remembering.
Our castle in Beauclair is magical its charms act powerfully on people muttered Reynart sipping wine and rolling it over his tongue. The view alone is able to charm. I remember how you gasped when you saw it in October. Cahir show us what expression he used then.
A spectacular castle Cahir said with admiration. On my soul it is admirable and pleasing to the eye.
A pretty place your Duchess lives said Regis. This has to be our stop.
A fucking nice place Angoulême added.
Palace Beauclair Reynart de Bois-Fresnes said proudly. An Elvish building only slightly modified and redesigned. Apparently by Faramond himself.
No doubt said the vampire. There is no doubt the Faramond style is evident at first glance. Just look at those towers.
The towers slender white obelisks that Regis pointed to rose high above the red roofs to the sky. At first sight they resembled candles with wax cascading down to the masterfully decorated base.
At the foot of Beauclair the Knight Reynart explained lies the city. The wall of course was added later after all elves do not build walls around a city. Spur your horses gentlemen we still have a long way to go. Beauclair looks close but the mountains throw off perspective.
Lets go.
On the way to the city they overtook carts and wagons lots of carts and wagons – all full of grapes. They entered the noisy and grape scented streets of a city park after dark full of poplar yew and berberis. They passed roses mostly multiflora varieties and centifolia.
Finally they stood before the carved columns and portals of the palace were stood soldiers and footmen in livery.
Among those that greeted them was Dandelion combed and dressed like a prince.
Where is Milva?
Its okay dont worry. She is sitting in the chambers which were prepared for you and does not want to move from there.
Why?
Well talk about that later. Now come the Duchess is waiting.
Right now?
That was her wish.
The hall into which they entered was full of people as colourful as birds of paradise. Geralt did not have time to look around because Dandelion pushed him towards a marble dais on which stood two women significantly differing from the surrounding society.
It was quiet but it grew quieter.
The first of the women had a sharp slightly raised nose and penetrating blue eyes that seemed feverish. Her auburn hair was adjusted in a perfect and truly artistic style tied with silk ribbons and submitted to the last detail – including flawless crescent curls on her forehead. The bodice of her dress was cut deep and interwoven with pale blue and iridescent purple stripes on a black background with a dense and regular design of small embroidered gold chrysanthemums. Her neck was adorned with a mesh of extremely complex goldsmiths work – a necklace of emeralds onyx and lapis lazuli the lowermost edge was completed with a jade cross located between her breasts bound by the tight bodice. It seemed that the fragile shoulders of the woman would not generate sufficient support for her broad and deep cleavage and that at any moment her breasts might slip out. However they remained in place kept in position by the secret mysteries of dressmaking and the buffers of puffy sleeves.
Her companion was more or less the same height and had lipstick on her lips the same colour. But thats where the similarity of the two women ended. The other wore her hair cropped short in a lace cap trimmed with a muslin veil reaching to the tip of her nose. The flower motif of the veil could not conceal her large lustrous eyes highlighted with green shadow. The same floral veil covered a very modest neckline of a black dress with long sleeves. The dress was seemingly randomly decorated with gold stars embroidered with tiny cut aquamarines and mountain crystals.
Her Ladyship the Duchess Anna Henrietta. Kneel Sir said someone whispering behind Geralt.
I wonder which one thought Geralt who with effort bent his sore knee in a ceremonial bow. Ill be damned if they both dont look royal.
Arise Sir Geralt the lady with the auburn hair and slightly raised nose dispelled his doubts. I welcome you to Castle Beauclair in the Principality of Toussaint. I am delighted to be able to host those who are carrying out such a noble mission. Moreover youve also been a friend to our dear Viscount Julian.
At these words Dandelion bowed deeply.
The Viscount continued the Duchess has revealed to me your names and the reason and purpose of your mission and told me what brings you to Toussaint. His story touched my heart. I am going to give you a private audience Sir Geralt. It will have to be delayed a small while as I am saddled with state requirements. The harvest is complete and tradition requires our participation in the feast of the vat.
The woman in the veil at the Duchesss side leaned forward and whispered something quickly. Anna Henrietta looked at the witcher smiled and licked her lips.
It is my desire she raised her voice that during the festival alongside Viscount Julian Geralt of Rivia will serve us.
A murmur swept through the group of courtiers and knights like the rustling of wind through the pines. The Duchess Anarietta gave the witcher one last glance and left the room with her companion and retinue of pages.
Damn said the Chessboard Knight. That is a surprise. You have received a great honour Sir Geralt.
Im not too clear what it was said Geralt. How should I serve Her Grace?
Her Belovedness corrected a nobleman with the appearance of a confectioner. Im sorry sir to correct you but I have to meet obligations. We in Toussaint adhere to tradition and protocol. I am Sebastian Le Goff chamberlain and marshal of the palace.
Pleased to meet you.
The official title of Lady Anna Henrietta said the chamberlain who not only looked like a confectioner but even smelled like icing is Your Enlightenedness and unofficially Lady Duchess for outside of court. But you should always address her as Your Belovedness.
Thank you Ill remember that. And the other lady? How do I title her?
Her official title is venerable the chamberlain instructed him seriously. But it is possible to address her as maam. She is a relative of the Duchess called Fringilla Vigo. According to the will of Her Belovedness it is Lady Fringilla that you will serve at the festival.
And what is involved with this service?
Nothing complicated. Let me tell you long ago we used mechanical presses for grapes but the tradition…
The courtyard resounded with the hum and trills of pipes flutes and the fierce clatter of drums and tambourines. On stage in the middle of the courtyard stood a huge vat in which jugglers and acrobats jumped around doing flips and somersaults. The courtyard and the galleries were crowded with spectators – ladies nobles knights burgesses merchants and common people.
Sebastian Le Goff lifted a staff entwined with vines and tapped it three times on the pavement.
Ho ho! He called. Noble ladies and gentlemen knights people!
Ho ho! Replied the crowd.
Ho ho! This is an ancient custom! Let the vines thrive! Ho ho! Let the sun ripen them!
Ho ho! Let them ripen!
Ho ho! Let them ferment! Let them take strength and flavour from the barrels! Let it change into wine! Let it flow into our cups and raise them to the honour of our majesty the beautiful ladies brave knights and industrious winemakers!
Ho ho! Cheers!
Let them Beauties come forward!
From a damask tent on the opposite side of the courtyard stood two women – Duchess Anna Henrietta and her dark-haired companion. Both were shrouded in long scarlet cloaks. Let the young come forward!
The young were instructed in advance what to do. Dandelion went to the Duchess and Geralt stepped out to meet the dark-haired companion who he knew as Fringilla Vigo.
Both women dropped their cloaks and the crowd rose in a thunderous ovation. Geralt swallowed.
The women were wearing sleeveless white shirts made of thin spiderweb like fabric which did not even reach to their thighs. And lacy panties. And nothing more. Not even jewellery. And they walked barefoot.
Geralt offered Fringilla his arm she willingly embraced him around the neck. She smelled of roses and amber. Her body was warm and soft.
The women were brought to the vat Geralt with Fringilla and the Duchess with Dandelion and helped to stand up in the grape juice. The crowd roared.
Ho ho!
Anarietta and Fringilla stood facing each other and laid their hands on each others shoulders to more easily maintain balance among the grapes which rose to above their knees.
Juice spat and sprayed. The women spun around inside the vat and laughed like kids.
Fringilla shot the witcher a playful wink.
Ho ho! Shouted the audience. Let then ferment!
Juice flowed and bubbled about the calves of the females.
The chamberlain struck his staff on the pavement. Geralt and Dandelion approached and help the women get out of the vat. Geralt saw Anarietta nibble on the troubadours ear when he lifted her in his arms. Her eyes glittered dangerously. He himself felt Fringillas lips brush his cheek but could not swear whether by accident or intentionally. The strong smell of wine hit him in the head. Fringilla stood on the stage and wrapped herself in a scarlet cloak. The brunette squeezed his hand strongly.
These old traditions she said can be exciting right?
Yes.
Thank you witcher.
The pleasure is all mine.
Not all of it I assure you.
Pour Reynart.
The company at the next table performed a more festive divination – throwing a chain of peeled apple skins and guessing there future partners from the letter it resembled. Even though practically every throw produced the letter S they continued to throw.
The knight poured.
Milva it turns out said the witcher lost in thought is healthy though she still wears a bandage around her ribs. But she is sitting in her room refusing to exit because she does not want to wear a bloody dress. It seemed that the conflict was going to break protocol but the situation was calmed by the omniscient Regis. Citing a hundred precedents forced the Chamberlain to bring her some male clothes. Angoulême was happy for a change to get rid of her pants and riding boots. After some soap a comb and a dress she resembles a pretty girl. All of us seem to be in a better mood after a bath and clean clothes. Even me. I was in a fairly good mood when we went to the audience…
Wait a minute interrupted Reynart and with a movement of his head indicated the across the taproom. We have some interest heading towards us. Ha not one but two vineyards. Our Customer Malatesta is bringing his neighbour… and competitor. Wonder of wonders!
Who is the second?
Pomerol vineyards. From there comes the Cote de Blessure the wine that we just drank.
Malatesta Vermentinos vineyard administrator waved his arms and rushed over to them. The man he was leading had lush black hair and a black moustache like an outlaw rather than an honourable citizen.
Allow me gentlemen Malatesta said. Mister Alcides Fierabras Pomerol vineyard administrator.
Sit down please.
Just a minute. Mister Witcher about the monster from our cellars. By the fact that you are here I assume the beast is slain. Am I correct?
Quite dead.
The agreed upon sum Malatesta assured him will be paid to your account with G later today. Thank you very much Mister Witcher. Very few large wineries can boast such a large cellar deep and spacious bearing to the north neither too dry nor too wet – just perfect for wine. It was a shame that it could not be used. Did you see for yourself the part of the cellar when the monster managed to crawl through? The devil knows from where… Probably straight out of hell…
The caves in volcanic tuffs often serve as havens for various monsters. Reynart instructed importantly. He had accompanied the witcher for more than a month and was a good listener and learned things. Sure enough where there is a tuff youll find a monster.
Maybe the tuff Malatesta squinted at him. But people say its because our basement connects with deep caverns that lead into the heart of the country. Such caves are numerous in this country…
You dont have to look far said the bearded Pomerol. Also under our cellars are corridors that stretch for miles and nobody knows where they end. Those who went to explore never returned. And there have been seen terrible monsters. So I would ask…
I can guess said the witcher what you would ask. I accept. I will examine your cellars. My fee is determined in accordance with this and what I come across.
You will not regret it said the bearded man. Uh uh uh… One more thing…
Speak. Im listening.
The succubus that haunts the nights and torments men… The one that the enlightened Duchess has ordered you to kill… I think there is no requirement to kill her. She bothers no one to tell the truth… Oh sometimes we will visit when drunk… to sometimes just try a little…
But only the adults Malatesta added quickly.
I had it on the tip of my tongue neighbour. As I said the succubus harms no one. And lately even appears to be frightened of you Mister Witcher. So why pursue her? After all you do not need the cash. But if you are offended…
You could help my account with Gianfanelli Geralt said with a straight face. A witcher pension fund.
So be it.
The succubuss blonde head will not fall.
And farewell both of the vineyard administrators stood up. We will leave you in peace and not disturb you. This is a day of festival. A tradition. And here in Toussaint a tradition is…
I know said Geralt. Holy.
The company at the next table should loudly with joy at a new divination which was made by using a ball of pie dough and the bones of a fish. Drinking at the same time. The innkeeper and the wenches bustled about running with jugs.
The famous succubus Reynart said scooping more cabbage into his dish was one of the first of the witcher contracts you accepted when you came to Toussaint. After that everything move so fast and you couldnt get rid of customers. The funny thing is I do not remember which of the wineries gave you your first assignment…
You were not there. I happened the second day after the audience with the Duchess. The audience where you were not needed.
Its no wonder. It was a private audience.
Private spluttered Geralt. It was attended by about twenty people. And that is not counting the footmen who were motionless as statues pages young children and a boring clown. Among those that I counted were Le Goff the chamberlain who would rather be a confectioner. There were several nobles bending under the weight of gold chains. There were a few cronies in black councillors maybe judges. There was baron with a bulls head coat of arms from Caed Myrkvid. And Fringilla of course who is obviously close to your duchess. And there was our bunch including Milva in male attire. Oh we were poorly expressed. It was not our whole group we were missing Dandelion. Dandelion or rather Viscount Julian was lounging in a chair beside Duchess Anarietta and strutted like a peacock. A royal favourite. Only Anarietta Fringilla and Dandelion sat. No one else was allowed to sit. Even so I was glad we did not have to kneel. The Duchess listened to me very intently but fortunately she jumped only a few times during my talk. When I finally briefly recounted my conversation with the flaminica she anxiously wrung her hands. The gesture was as sincere as it was exaggerated. It probably sounds like an absurd contradiction in terms but trust me Reynart it was precisely so.
Oh oh oh sighed the Duchess Anna Henrietta wringing her hands. Your story distresses me Mister Geralt. It seizes my heart with sadness.
She sniffled her nose and reached out her hand Dandelion at once placed a cambric handkerchief embroidered with a monogram into it. The Duchess touched the handkerchief lightly to her cheeks so as not to remove her makeup.
Oh oh she repeated. So the druids know nothing of Ciri? Were they not able to offer help? Were all your efforts in vain as the outcome of your journey?
Surely not in vain he answered. I recognise that I did not get any concrete information from the druids or any clues albeit only the most vague to explain why Ciri had become the object of such fierce persecution. The druids however could not or would not help. In that case I really did not learn anything new but…
He paused for a moment. Not to be dramatic but just to wonder if he could speak frankly in from of the whole gathering.
I know Ciri lives he said dryly. Probably was injured. And is still in danger. But she lives.
Anna Henrietta sighed again and took the handkerchief from Dandelion again.
I promise you our help and support she said. Stay in Toussaint as long as you wish. You should know that I used to visit Cintra I knew and cultivated a friendship with Pavetta and knew and loved little Ciri. I am with you wholeheartedly Mister Geralt. If necessary you will have the assistance of our scholars and sorcerers. The doors of our library and bookstores are open to you. I believe that we can find some clue some sign or indication to point you on the right track. Do not act hastily. You need not hasten. You can stay here as a welcome guest as long as necessary.
I thank you for your kindness and grace Geralt bowed. However we must continue on the road. Ciri is still in danger. And we are also in danger. When we stop for too long in one place the danger not only grows but begins to threaten the people around us. I will not allow this.
The Duchess was silent for a while stroking Dandelions forearm with a rhythmic movement like a cat.
Your words are noble and honest. But you do not have to worry here. The villains that stalked you were crushed by my knighthood so that none escape so I have been briefed by Viscount Julian. And one who dares cross your path better be careful. You are under my protection.
I appreciate that Geralt swept another bow and cursed his sore knee in spirit and not just his knee. However I must not conceal what Viscount Dandelion has forgotten to tell you. The rogues who chased me to Belhaven and the one that the brave knights beat in Caed Myrkvid were indeed rogues from the guild of illustrious rogues but also wore the colour of Nilfgaard.
And what of it?
Well this was the tip of the force of Nilfgaardians that conquered Aedirn in twenty days and they could do the same to you Duchy in twenty minutes.
It is a war he insisted. What happened in the woods of Caed Myrkvid and Belhaven maybe regarded as rebellion and disruption to the rear of the imperial troops. Something like that usually causes repression. In a state of war…
The war interrupted the Duchess lifting her nose in the air has undoubtedly been revoked. I wrote of this matter to my cousin Emhyr var Emreis. In my letter I asked him firmly to stop the senseless bloodshed. The war has ended and there has definitely been a peace agreement.
Not so Geralt said calmly. Across the Yaruga roam sword and fire blood is being spilled. There is no indication that the war was to end. Rather the opposite.
He immediately regretted what he said.
How is this possible? The Duchesss nose lifted even higher her voice became harsh. Did I hear right? The war continues? Why were we not told about this? Minister Tremblay?
Excellency I… one if the nobles in gold chains fell to his knees. I did not want to worry… Upset… Highness…
Guards she screamed. To the tower with him! Youre fallen out of favour Mister Tremblay! In disgrace! Lord Chamberlain! Mister Secretary!
At your orders Your grace…
Have our foreign minister immediately send a note to our cousin the Emperor of Nilfgaard. We demand that he immediately immediately cease fighting and sign for peace. For war and discord are bad things! Discord ruins strength and harmony!
Your truth has clarity said the Chamberlain. So far he smelled like powdered sugar now his face took on its colour.
What are you still doing here gentlemen? I have issued an order. No go act!
Geralt looked around discreetly. The noble and officials maintained their stone faces similar incidents like this were nothing new at court. He decided from now on he was just going to agree with the Duchess.
Anarietta took the handkerchief and touch the tip of her nose with it and smiled at Geralt.
As you can see she said. Your fears were in vain. You have nothing to fear and can stay here as long as you want.
Yes Your Excellency.
In the silence you could clearly hear the worms chewing wood in the antique furniture. And the curse of one of the groom in the far courtyard dealing with a horse.
We would also like to ask you something Mister Geralt Anarietta interrupted the silence. Since you are a witcher.
At your service Your Excellency.
It is a plea from the many of the virtuous ladies of Toussaint. A nightmare is troubling their homes. A spirit a demon in female form a succubus so shameless that we dare not describe her tortures faithful and virtuous spouses. She enters the bedrooms at night and makes all kinds of knavery and abominable perversion that our modesty forbids us to speak of. You as an expert certainly know what it is.
Yes Your Excellency.
The women on Toussaint ask that you put an end to this indecency. And I assure you our infinite gratitude.
Thank you for your confidence Your Excellency.
Angoulême found the witcher and the vampire in the castle park; both were enjoying a walk and a quiet conversation.
You will not believe she said. You will not believe what I have to tell you. But it is the pure truth…
Speak.
Reynart de Bois-Fresnes the Checkerboard knight in addition to other knights are in line at the county treasurers chamber. And you know what for? To collect his pay for this month! The line is at least half an archery field long and there are so many tabards the eyes get tired. When I asked Reynart about it he said that a knight-errant shouldnt starve.
What is so strange in all this?
Are you kidding! A man becomes a knight for a noble calling! Not for a monthly salary!
One does not exclude the other Regis said seriously. Trust me Angoulême.
Trust him Angoulême Geralt said drily. Stop running around the castle in search of sensation go keep Milva company. She is in a terrible mood and should not be left alone.
Right. Auntie has her period and because of it is more angry than a wasp. I think…
Angoulême!
Im going Im going.
Regis and Geralt stopped before a bed of slightly wilted Centifolias. Yet they were unable to continue their conversation. From behind a greenhouse emerged a man dressed in an elegant coat of sienna.
Good morning he bowed and wiped his knee with his biretta. Can I ask which of you gentlemen praise be is the witcher named Geralt famous in his trade?
I am.
My name is Jean Catillon I am the steward of the Castel Toricella vineyards. The thing is that we could use a witcher in the cellars. I wanted to inquire if you were willing to…
What is it?
Well began Catillon because of this damn war merchants rarely come so inventories increase and there are no new places in the cellars for the new barrels. We thought that the various caves and tunnels below the castle which are said to stretch across our country could be expanded. We found a suitable cave – large vaulted neither too wet or dry it would have been good for the wine…
So what? The witcher could not stand it.
It appears that there is a monster prowling in the cave. It burned two people reducing one to bones and the other one was left blind sir the monster spits or vomits some kind of caustic lye or something…
A solpuga said Geralt. Also called a venenosera.
Here smiled Regis. You can see for yourself Sir Catillon that you are dealing with a professional. A professional it seems who has fallen from heaven. And have you asked for help from the famous local knights? The Duchess has a whole regiment of them and this is precisely their kind of mission their reason for being.
That is not their reason Steward Catillon shook his head. Their reason is to protect the highways routes and passes because if the merchants dont reach here we would soon be broke. In addition our knights are brave and warlike – but only on horseback. They wouldnt go underground for anything. And plus they are expensive…
He stopped and was silent. He had the look of a man who wanted to spit but couldnt. And a look of regret.
They are expensive Geralt finished for him but not particularly scathing. Take note my good man that I am even more expensive. Its a competitive market. But if we have a contract Ill dismount from my horse and go underground. Think about it but do not think about it too long because I will not be in Toussaint long.
You surprise me Regis said as soon as the steward had walked away. Has the witcher in you suddenly been revived? Do you accept the contract? Are you going to hunt the monster?
I too am surprised Geralt admitted frankly. I reacted unconsciously impulsively. Somehow I felt pulled to it. But a bid can be rejected as too low. Lets get back to our conversation.
Wait a minute Regis said looking over his shoulder. Something tells me that youre about to have more business.
Geralt cursed under his breath. On a path lined with cypress two knights were walking towards them. He instantly recognised the first one; the enormous bulls head on a field of white snow could not be confused with any other shield. The second knight tall grey with nobly angular features like they were carved from granite had a cross with golden lilies on a blue background. Stopping at the prescribed distance of two steps the knights bowed. Geralt and Regis bowed back; the four of them remained in orderly silence by the tradition of chivalry for the count of ten heartbeats.
Allow me gentlemen said the man with the bulls head shield to introduce Baron Palmerin de Launfal. And I as you can remember am called…
Baron de Peyrac-Peyran. As if it was possible to forget.
We have a case for the witcher said Baron de Peyrac-Peyran. Relative so to speak to his professional work.
Speak.
In private.
I have no secrets from Mister Regis.
But the noble lords have them the vampire smiled. Therefore if I may I will take a look at that beautiful pavilion which is probably a secluded toilet. Lord de Peyrac-Peyran… Lord de Launfal…
Bows were exchanged.
Im listening Geralt broke the silence without thinking for a moment about waiting ten heartbeats.
Its Peyrac-Peyran lowered his voice and looked around fearfully the succubus… The spirit that haunts the night. The Duchess and ladies have asked you to destroy. May I ask how much you have been promised to kill the monster?
Im sorry gentlemen but it is a professional secret.
We understand we understand said the knight with the cross of lilies. It is clear that we are dealing with an honourable man. Verily I fear that such a man will find insult with our proposal but I must give it. Renounce this contract Sir Witcher. Please leave the succubus alone. We will not say anything to the Duchess and the ladies. And on my honour we men of Toussaint will exceed the amount of the ladies. You would be amazed by our generosity.
Your proposal said the witcher in a cold voice is in fact not too far from an insult.
Mister Geralt Palmerin de Launfals face was hard and serious. Ill tell you what we dare to propose. Ergo there is a rumour about you. Saying that you only kill those monsters that are a threat. A real threat. Not from imagination or from ignorance or prejudice. Let me tell you that the succubus does not threaten or harm anyone. Oh she visits sleeping men… from time to time… And mortifies a little…
But only to adults Peyrac-Peyran quickly added.
The ladies of Toussaint Geralt said looking around would not be very happy if they knew of this conversation. Nor would the Duchess.
We fully agree with you murmured Palmerin de Launfal. We recommend the utmost discretion. There is no need to irritate the bigoted guardian of decency.
Open an account for me with one of the local dwarven banks Geralt said slowly and quietly. And amaze me with your generosity. But be advised that it is not easy to amaze me.
We are still going to try Peyrac-Peyran said confidently.
They exchanged farewells.
He returned to Regis who of course had heard everything with his vampire hearing.
Now he said without smiling you can argue that it was an involuntary reflex and inexplicable impulse. But how do you explain that to an open bank account?
Geralt looked somewhere high above the tops of the cypress trees.
Who knows he said. Maybe well spend a few days here. Given Milvas broken ribs it may even be more than a few days. Maybe a couple of weeks? It would not hurt if during this time we gained some financial independence.
So thats were there bank account with Gianfanelli came from Reynart de Bois-Fresnes shook his head. Well if the Duchess finds out it will mean new changes in rank there would be a new distribution of patents. Ha maybe Id even get promoted? On my honour its a shame you do not have the qualities of a snitch. Tell me now of the famous banquet that caused you so much joy. I longed to take part in it to eat and drink! But they sent me to the border to a watchtower in the cold and grey mountains. What despair the fate of a knight…!
The large and highly anticipated banquet Geralt said was prepared with great care and diligence. We mainly had to find Milva who had holed up in the stables and convince her that her attendance at the banquet was essential and upon it depended the fate of Ciri and nearly the whole world. We almost forcibly compelled her to wear womens clothes. Then we had to get Angoulême to promise to behave as a well-behaved young lady and to especially avoid words like fuck and ass. And when we finally got everything ready and to ensure our success we downed a cup of wine your confectioner Le Goff appeared. Smelling like frosting and puffing like a pigs bladder.
By virtue of my office Le Goff said through his nose. I want to assure you that at the festive board Her Highness has few places of honour and importance therefore no one can feel prejudice to the place allocated to him. But because here in Toussaint we pay special attention to traditions and customs…
Get to the point sir.
The banquet is tomorrow. I organise all guests according to their origin and status.
Sure the Witcher said seriously. The most important of us is Dandelion. Both in origin and status.
Viscount Julian the Chamberlain said wrinkling his nose is an extraordinary guest of honour. As such he will sit at the right hand of Her Serene Highness.
Sure repeated the Witcher with all seriousness. And he has failed to clarify what our ranks titles and honours are?
He revealed the Chamberlain coughed but only that the noble gentlemen and maidens are travelling incognito and therefore cannot reveal their names ranks and titles.
That is correct. What is the problem?
I have to know! You are guest and companions of the Viscount so you will be sitting near the head of the table… Among the Barons. But it is still possible that you gentlemen and ladies maybe of a higher rank which would entitle you to sit closer to the Duchess…
He said the witcher pointing to the vampire without hesitation who was not far away admiring a tapestry which took up most of the wall is an Earl. But not a word about it. It is a secret.
I understand gasped the fat man with excitement. In those circumstances… I will seat him next to Countess Notturna the noble and gracious aunt of the Duchess.
You will not regret it neither you nor the aunt Geralt assured him with a straight face. The Earl has no equal in the ways of art and conversation.
I am pleased to hear it. For your part Lord of Rivia I will sit you next to the venerable Lady Fringilla. As is the tradition. You carried her to the vat you are her… hmmm… knight as it…
I understand.
Excellent. Ah Earl…
What? The vampire said surprised having just moved away from the tapestry representing the battle with a Cyclops.
Nothing nothing Geralt smiled. We were just talking.
Aha Regis nodded. I do not know if you gentlemen have noticed… But the Cyclops in the tapestry the one with the club… Look at the toes on his feet. Im afraid to say that he has two left feet.
Indeed Chamberlain Le Goff confirmed without a trace of amazement. There are more of these tapestries in Beauclair. The weaver who wove it was a true master. But he drank a lot. But he was an artist.
Its time said the witcher avoiding the eyes of the wine tipsy girls peering at him from the other table who were amusing themselves with divination. Lets go Reynart. Pay up get the horses and lets go to Beauclair.
I know why you are in such a hurry the knight showed his teeth. Dont worry green eyes will be waiting. It is hardly midnight. Tell me about the banquet.
Ill tell you and well go.
Lets go.
The sight of the huge horseshoe shaped banquet table clearly reminded them that autumn was finished and winter was approaching. Among the food bowls and trays were platters of venison and all possible types of game. There were whole quarters of wild boar deer hams and pink slices of smoked meat and pies. All decorated with seasoned mushrooms cranberries and rowanberries. There were autumn birds – grouse pheasant quail served with decorative wings and tails roasted in hazel and mistle. They also served fish – trout and pike fished from the mountain streams.
Even in autumn they did not lack the festive greens. It included a salad of lettuce which must have been harvested while still under the snow. Flowers had been substituted with mistletoe.
In the middle of the horseshoe table at the place of honour where the Duchess Anarietta and her guest would sit was a large silver tray filled with decorations. Among the flowers lemon slices artichoke hearts and truffles stood an enormous sturgeon on whose back stood a heron. In its raised beak it held a golden ring.
I swear by the heron! Peyrac-Peyran the well-known Baron with the bulls head coat of arms cried standing up and raising his cup. By the heron I swear to defend the honour of knighthood and to never leave the field to anyone!
The vow was rewarded with tumultuous applause. They began to eat.
I swear by the heron shouted another knight with a twisted aggressive moustache like a broom. I swear to defend to the last drop of my blood the borders of Her Excellency Anna Henrietta! To prove my loyalty I swear to paint on my shield a heron and for a year to fight incognito and shall be called the Knight of the White Heron! Health to Our Lady the Duchess!
Health! Happiness! Cheers! Long live the Duchess!
Anarietta thanked them with a slight nod of her diamond tiara decorated head. She was wearing so many diamonds that if she was to walk past a window she would scratch the glass. Dandelion sat beside her and smiled stupidly. A little further on between two matrons sat Emiel Regis. He was dressed in a black velvet jacket which made him look like a vampire. He served the matrons with conversation and they listened fascinated.
Geralt took a platter covered in a perch and parsley and offered it to Fringilla Vigo who was sitting to his left. She wore a gown of blue satin and a gorgeous amethyst necklace. She looked at him from under her long eyelashes lifted her cup and smiled mysteriously.
Your health Geralt. Im glad that we sat next to each other.
Do not praise the day before sunset he said returning her smile because he was in a good mood. The banquet has barely begun.
On the contrary. It has lasted long enough you havent given me a compliment. How long must I wait?
Your beauty so dazzles me that I lack the words.
Slow down slow down she laughed and he swore that it was honest. I fear to think how far we would go at this rate before the end of the banquet. Start from… Well say I have an elegant dress and blue suits me.
The colour blue suits you. But I have to admit that I liked you more in white.
He recognised a challenge in her emerald eyes. He feared to accept it. His good humour did not reach that far.
Cahir and Milva sat on the opposite side of the table. The young man was sitting between two noble young ladies probably baronesses that kept talking to him. Meanwhile the archer kept company with an older gentleman dark and silent his stone face scarred from smallpox.
A little further on sat Angoulême leading yarns and the uproar of young knights. What is this? She squeaked waving around a silver knife. A blunt knife? Are they afraid that we will start a fight at the banquet?
These knives explained Fringilla have been used in Beauclair since the days of Princess Caroline Roberta Anna Henriettas grandmother. Karoberta hated when the guests at the table picked their teeth with knives and blades with rounded tips were introduced so there was no way of picking.
No way agreed Angoulême smiling impishly. Fortunately they gave me a fork!
She pretended to put the fork in her mouth but a menacing glare from Geralt stopped her. The knight who sat to his right laughed with a vibrant falsetto.
Geralt took a pot of duck in aspic and served it to Fringilla. He saw two young Baronesses religiously looking at Cahir and how he honestly tried to divide among them equally his attention. He saw the young knights bustle around Angoulême getting her food and laughing at her silly jokes.
He saw Milva crumbling bread and staring at the tablecloth.
Fringilla seemed to read his thoughts.
Its too bad she whispered leaning towards him about your tight-lipped friend. Well such things happen when laying out the table. Chivalry is not Baron de Trastamaras strong point.
Maybe its better Geralt said quietly a slobbery and willing courtier would have been worse. I know Milva.
Are you sure? She looked at him quickly. Could it be you measure her with your own staff? Which frankly. Is pretty grim.
He did not answer instead he poured wine. And he recognised it was time to clarify a certain issue.
Youre a sorceress right?
I am she said deftly hiding her total surprise. How did you know?
I can feel an aura he did not enter into details. I have had experience.
To be clear she said. I did not intend to deceive anyone. On the other hand I am under no obligation to show off my profession or to impose a pointy hat and black cloak. Why should they have to scare children with me? I have the right to be incognito.
I do not deny it.
I am in Beauclair because here is the largest and richest library in the known world. Besides the university that is. But universities guard access to their shelves and here I am a relative and friend to Anarietta and can do anything I want.
An enviable position.
During the audience the duchess suggested that in the library or archive you may find some useful information. Do not be fooled by her exaltation shes like that. But you may find something in the local books. You just have to know where to look.
As simple as that.
Your enthusiasm is really contagious and encourages me to continue the conversation her green eyes flashed. I guess the reason is because you do not trust me correct?
Would you like more hazel grouse?
I swear by the heron! A young knight from the end of the horseshoe got up and tied a sash that was held out by a neighbour at the table around one eye. I vow to not take off this sash until all the bandits in the passage of Cervantes are killed!
The Duchess nodded at him with her sparkling tiara.
Geralt hoped Fringilla would not pursue the subject. He was wrong.
You do not believe or trust me she said. You have caused me a painful double blow. Not only do you doubt the sincerity that I want to help but you do not believe that I can. Oh Geralt! You have hurt my pride and lofty ambition.
Listen…
No! She raised her knife and fork as if threatened them. Do not explain yourself. I cannot stand men who are justified.
What kind of man can you stand?
Her eyes narrowed but she still held the cutlery like knives ready to strike.
The list is long she said slowly and I do not want to bore you with the details. I will mention only those men occupied by distinguished positions who are willing to follow a loved one to the end of the world and do not succumb to fear and despise danger. And do not give up even when it seems there is no chance.
What about other positions on the list? He could not contain himself. Are their men who you do like? Are they also crazy?
What is real masculinity she mockingly shook her head but the right mixture of crazy and style?
Ladies and gentlemen barons and knights! Cried the Chamberlain Le Goff as he rose and stood with both hands on a gigantic glass. Under these circumstances I would make a toast to the health of our most serene Ladyship the Duchess Anna Henrietta!
Health and happiness!
Hurray!
Long live the Duchess!
And now ladies and gentlemen the Chamberlain set down the glass and gestured towards the servants Now… Magna beast!
On a tray resting on the shoulders of four strapping servants was a gargantuan roast being brought into the hall.
Magna beast! The rest of the guest cried in chorus. Hurray! Magna beast!
And what fucking beast is that? Angoulême expressed her concern aloud. I wont eat it until I find out what it is.
Its a deer Geralt said. A roast deer.
And not just any deer Milva spoke clearing her throat. The deer weighs about seven hundredweight.
Close. It is seven hundredweight and forty pounds said the baron sitting next to her hoarsely. They were the first words that he had spoken since the beginning of the banquet.
Maybe it would have been the beginning of a conversation but the archer blushed fixed her eyes on the tablecloth and resumed crushing her bread.
But Geralt took to heart Fringillas words.
Were you perhaps Lord Baron he asked the happy hunter who took down this beast?
No he replied. My nephew an excellent marksman. But these are mens interests so to speak… Im sorry I did not mean to bore the ladies present…
From what bow? Milva asked still staring at the tablecloth. Im sure from at least a seventy?
The double bent zefar the Baron said slowly visibly surprised. Laminate Layers of yew acacia ash and bonded tendons. Seventy-five pounds of force.
And tension?
Twenty-nine inches the Baron spoke more slowly he seemed to almost spit out the words.
A nice piece Milva said happily. It can shot a deer from perhaps a hundred paces. If the shooter is really good.
I growled the Baron somewhat indignantly at a quarter of a hundred paces hit a pheasant.
At a quarter of a hundred paces Milva lifted her head I hit a squirrel.
The Baron clearly flustered quickly started on his food and drink.
A good bow is half the success he stammered. But equally important so to speak are quality arrows. To me the best…
To the health of Her Excellency Anna Henrietta! To the health of Viscount Julian de Lettenhove!
Cheers!
…And she kicked him in the ass Angoulême finished another silly joke. The young knights rolled with laughter.
The Baronesses whose names were Queline and Nique listened to Cahir with open mouths wide eyes and burning cheeks. At the head of the banquet table could be heard Regis and the higher aristocracy. For Geralt – even with his witcher hearing – could only make out a few buzz words here and there but they seemed to be talking about ghosts strigas succubi and vampires. Regis gesticulated with a silver fork and argued the best remedy for vampires are silver whose lightest touch is absolutely deadly to a vampire. What about garlic? Asked one of the ladies. Garlic is also effective; Regis went on but socially awkward because of the awful smell.
In the gallery an orchestra played softly fiddles and flutes and jugglers and fire-eaters boasted their arts. Jesters tried to entertain the company but Angoulême raked over the top of them. Then came a bear – which to everyones amusement did a pile on the floor. Angoulême became sad – she could not compete with something like that.
The Duchess suddenly fell into a rage – with some reckless word one of the barons fell out of favour and went under escort to the tower. No one but the victim showed any sorrow.
Dont leave here so quickly Fringilla Vigo said suddenly sipping from a cup. Even if you prefer to run away none of this will.
Please do not read my thoughts.
Sorry. They were so strong that I read them involuntarily.
I dont know how many times I have heard that.
I myself dont know how many times I know. Please eat the artichokes they are healthy and are good for the heart. The heart is an important organ in the male the second when it comes to validity.
I thought the most important were rank and madness.
Qualities of the mind should go hand in hand with qualities of the body. This gives perfection.
Nobody is perfect.
This is not an argument. You have to try them. You know what. I will have that hazel grouse.
He cut the bird on her plate so fast and suddenly that the witch trembled.
Do not leave here so fast she said again. First because you do not have too. And you are not in danger…
Of course not he burst out. Nilfgaard will be frightened of a protest note from the Duchess. And if they did risk coming here theyd be expelled by knights with sashes binding their eyes and vows made to herons.
Nothing threatens you here she said ignoring his sarcasm. Toussaint is considered the land of fairy tales silly clueless and thanks to its sustained economic focus in a state of constant drinking and recklessness. As such it is not taken seriously by anyone but is permitted to enjoy certain privileges. In the end we are the most prominent producer of wine and as we know life without wine would be very unstable. In Toussaint there are no spies agents or secret service. Toussaint doesnt need an army just wandering knights wearing blindfolds because Toussaint is never attacked. By the look of you I guess I have not convinced you.
Not at all.
A pity Fringilla squinted. I hate half-measures or half-promises. Neither of these things should be done by half. So Ill tell you – Fulko Artevelde the prefect of Riebrune thinks you are dead some fugitives told him that the druids burned you alive. Fulko is doing his best to cover up the matter. If the case came to light it could trigger an investigation that could cost Fulko his career at best. And when he sees you alive it will be too late – what he said in the reports will be binding.
You know a lot.
I do not deny it. So the argument about the persecution from the Nilfgaardians disappears. And now nothing forces your rapid departure.
Interesting.
But true. From Toussaint you can leave by four passes that lead to four different parts of the world. The Druids did not tell you anything and refused to cooperate. The mountain elf has disappeared…
You really do know a lot.
You already said that.
And you want to help.
And you refuse my help. You do not believe in the sincerity of my intentions. You dont trust me.
Listen I…
Do not explain yourself. Eat some more artichokes.
Again someone made a vow to the heron. Cahir spoke to the baronesses giving them compliments. Angoulême tipsy could be heard throughout the whole room. The pockmarked and flushed baron mesmerized by discussions about archery and hunting even started flirting with Milva.
Please my lady try the wild boar ham. So to speak… They are from my manor forest where a whole herd of them reside.
Oh.
There are among them some outstanding boars to hunt… Maybe sometime… you could come and we can so to speak go hunting together…
But we will not be staying here long Milva looked pleadingly at Geralt. More important tasks than hunting lie ahead.
But when she saw how disappointed the Baron looked she hastily added Under other circumstances I would be happy to go hunting boars.
The Baron immediately cheered up.
If not for hunting he said elated at least for a visit. I would honestly like to invite you all to my manor. I can show you so to speak my collection of hunting trophies bows and sword…
Milva looked down at the tablecloth. The Baron grabbed a tray of fowl and served her then filled her cup.
Excuse me graceful maiden he said. Im not so to speak an entertaining companion. I do not control courtly manners and smooth words are foreign to me…
I Milva shyly confessed I was raised in the woods. I can appreciate peace and silence.
Fringilla found Geralts hand under the table and held it tightly. Geralt looked into her eyes. He could not guess what was hidden in them.
I trust you he said. I believe in the sincerity of your purpose.
You do not lie?
I vow by the heron.
The City guard must have had the chance to celebrate Yule because he walked unsteadily banging his halberd into signs and through a slurred proclamation announced that it was the tenth of the clock when in fact it was well after midnight.
Youll have to go to Beauclair alone Reynart de Bois-Fresnes said soon after they left the tavern. I shall stay in the city. Good night Geralt.
The Witcher knew that his friend had a love affair with a certain lady. Whose husband is often on the road for business. He never talked about it because men do not talk of such things.
Good night Reynart. Take care of the skoffin. Dont let it spoil.
Its freezing.
It was freezing. The streets were empty and dark. The moon shone on the roofs shining like diamonds on the ice that hung from the eaves. Roachs horseshoes rang against the pavement.
Roach thought the witcher as he headed towards the palace of Beauclair a graceful grey mare a gift from Anna Henrietta. And Dandelion.
He urged his horse forwards. Hurrying up.
The next day after the banquet they all met for breakfast and they soon became accustomed to going straight to the castle kitchen. For some reason they were always welcome and always found something for them in the pots pans or grills usually bread bacon cheese or maybe pickled mushrooms. They never missed a jar or two of red or white from the famous local vineyards.
They went there every morning for the two weeks they spent in Beauclair – Geralt Regis Cahir Milva and Angoulême. Only Dandelion had breakfast elsewhere.
He Angoulême slathered some bread with butter has his bacon brought to him in bed! With everyone bowing to him!
Geralt was willing to believe that the girl was right. And this morning decided to check it out.
He found Dandelion in the Knights Hall. The poet wore a crimson beret as big as a loaf of bread and was wearing a doublet of the same colour richly embroidered with gold thread. He was sitting on a stool with his lute on his knees and his head was nodding carelessly in answer to the flattery of the courtiers and ladies who circled around him.
Anna Henrietta was thankfully not in sight so Geralt unhesitatingly violated etiquette and headed straight for his friend. Dandelion saw him coming swelled and with an imperious gesture said Ladies and gentlemen please leave us in private. Also the servants are allow to leave.
He clapped his hands and before the echo of his clap returned from the vaulted ceiling of the hall only the two of them stood there – and the smell of perfume which hovered in the air after the ladies left.
Pretty fun. Geralt said without exaggeration this is the chase huh? It must be a nice feeling to give orders or clap or a monarchical frown. See how they retreat like crabs bending before you in reverence. Pretty fun right? Sir Favourite?
Dandelion scowled.
Are you here for something specific he said gruffly or just this crap?
About something very specific.
Speak Im listening.
I need three riding horses. For me Cahir and Angoulême. And two wagons loaded with rations and feed. Can you ask for them from your Duchess? You have served long enough I hope?
No problem Dandelion tuned his lute not looking at the witcher. But Im surprised by your haste. I would say it surprises me as much as your silly sarcasm.
My urgency surprises you?
Just so you know. October is over and the weather deteriorates noticeably. Snow will be falling in the passes any day now.
And you wonder at my hurry the witcher nodded. But that reminds me get more warm clothing. Fur.
I thought Dandelion said slowly that we would wait out the winter here. That we would be here…
If you like Geralt said without thinking you can stay.
Yes Dandelion put his lute aside and stood up. I think I will stay.
The witcher gasped audibly. He was silent. He looked at the tapestry which depicted an imaginary fight between a titan and a dragon. The titan was standing on two left feet trying to break the dragons jaw and the dragon did not look too thrilled.
Im staying Dandelion repeated. I love Anarietta. And she loves me.
Geralt remained silent.
I will arrange the horses Dandelion promised. For you Ill prepare a thoroughbred mare named Roach of course. For the journey you will also get food equipment and warm clothing. But honestly I advise you to wait until spring. Anarietta…
Do I hear you correctly? The Witcher finally regained his voice. Are my ears deceiving me?
Your reason has certainly failed snapped the troubadour How are your other senses I dont know. But to be safe I will repeat – Anarietta and I love you. Abide in Toussaint. With her.
Like what? A lover? A favourite? Or maybe the Prince Consort?
Formal and legal status doesnt mean anything to me Dandelion admitted frankly. But you cant rule out anything. Marriage or not.
Geralt was silent again contemplating the titans battle against the dragon.
Dandelion he said finally. If youve been drinking sober up quickly. If you havent been drinking then lets have a drink. Then well talk.
I dont quite understand Dandelion said frowning. What are you saying?
Think a minute.
Are you embarrassed about my relationship with Anarietta? Are you asking me to reconsider it? Dont worry Ive thought about it. Anarietta loves me…
Have you ever heard a saying said Geralt that princesses leap after love like hares? Even if Anarietta is not so frivolous forgive my candour it seems to me that…
What?
That it is only in fairy tales that Duchesses marry musicians.
First of all snapped Dandelion Even such an ignoramus like you should have heard of morganatic marriages. Do I have to get out some examples from ancient and recent history? Secondly it may surprise you but I am not of insignificance. My family de Lettenhove are derived from…
Im listening to you Geralt cut him off again and I dont believe my own ears. Is this really my friend Dandelion who is speaking such crap? If it is indeed my friend Dandelion has he lost all shred of reason? Is it really Dandelion whom I had known to be a realist who is now living in a sphere of illusion? Open your eyes you idiot!
Oh the troubadour said slowly clenching his lips. The roles are reversed. I am blind but you have become a sober and factual observer. It used to be the opposite. And what is this curious thing that I cannot see? Huh? What have I according to you closed my eyes to?
Most of all said the witcher that your chosen duchess is arrogant and ridiculous and spoiled. She is a big child for whom you are nothing but a toy which she will discard without reproach as soon as a new musician appears with a fascinating new repertoire.
What you say is low and vulgar. I hope you realise?
I realise that you have gone completely mad Dandelion.
The poet was silent stroking the neck of his lute. It took some time before he spoke again.
We came out of Brokilon on a joy expedition. Without the slightest chance of success we followed a mirage a dream a desire an unattainable ideal. We set off in pursuit like crazy fools. But I Geralt I did not say a word of complaint. I did not call you crazy or ridicule you. Because you were filled with hope and love. They guided you on this insane mission. And me too. But I have caught up with a mirage and I was lucky enough that the dream came true. My mission has ended. I have found what is hard to find. And I cannot give it up. Is that supposed to be madness? Id be a fool if I left.
Geralt was silent for as long as Dandelion had been before.
Poetry he said. In that you have no equal. I do not have anything to say you have convinced me with your arguments. Farewell Dandelion.
Farewell Geralt.
The library of the palace was indeed huge. The room which housed it was at least twice the size of the Knights Hall where he had left Dandelion. The library had a glass ceiling through which sunlight poured. Geralt imagined however that in summer it would heat up like hell.
The passages between the shelves were so narrow that they had to walk very carefully to avoid knocking over stacks of books.
Here I am He heard a call.
The centre of the library disappeared among piles of books. Many lay completely disordered one by one or in clusters.
Here Geralt.
He found here between the bookish canyons and gorges. She was kneeling among scattered books fanning them and sorting. She wore a modest grey dress pulled up slightly for comfort. Geralt saw that the view was very attractive.
Do not be scared of this mess she said wiping her forehead with her forearm because her hands were covered in thin silk gloves dirty from dust. They are performing inventory and cataloguing. But they have stopped at my request. I wanted to be alone in the library. I cannot work when a stranger is gazing at the back of my neck.
Im sorry. Do you want me to leave?
Youre not a stranger she narrowed her green eyes. Your gaze does not bother me… On the contrary it makes me happy. Dont just stand there. Sit down here on the books.
He sat down on a hardcover encyclopaedia.
This is a mess Fringilla made a sweeping gesture around her but it is going to make my job easier. I can get to the volumes that would normally lie at the bottom of a pile and would be impossible to move. The court librarians moved mountains of papers and parchments so some of the real jewels of literature can see the light of day some true rarities. Look. Have you ever see this?
Speculum Aureum? Ive seen it.
I forgot sorry. Youve seen a lot. That was a compliment not sarcasm. But look at this one Gesta Regum. From this we begin to understand who your Ciri really is and what blood flows in her veins… You know you look even more sour than usual. What is the reason?
Dandelion.
Will you tell me about it?
He spoke. Fringilla listened sitting with her legs crossed on the pile of books.
Hmmm she said when he had finished. I admit that I expected something similar. I have noticed Anarietta showing unmistakable signs of falling in love.
Falling in love? He raised his eyebrows. Or a noble whim?
Do you not believe she looked at him sharply of a pure and sincere love?
My belief or disbelief he said has nothing to do with it. It is Dandelion and his obsessive…
He suddenly lost confidence and did not finish.
With love Fringilla said it is like nervous cramps. You cannot even be effected until they attack and you cannot even imagine something like that. And when you describe it nobody would believe it.
Some part does agreed the witcher. But there are also differences. Against nervous cramps common sense wont protect you. And there is no cure.
Love mocks sense. That is part of its charm and beauty.
Stupidity rather.
She got up and approached him while taking off her gloves. Her eyes gave the feeling of being deep and dark behind the curtain of her lashes. She smelled of amber roses the dust from the library aging paper and printing ink. Those smells had nothing to do with aphrodisiacs – and yet for him they worked.
You do not believe her voice changed in love at first sight? Fatal attraction? The collision of celestial bodies?
She reached out and put her hands on his shoulders. He grabbed her around the waist. Her face approached reluctantly wary as if afraid to frighten some very timid creature.
And then the celestial bodies collided and the earth moved.
They fell in a pile of parchment that scattered everywhere under their weight. Geralt stuck his nose into Fringillas neckline. He hugged her and grabbed her knee. He rolled up her skirt to her waist knocking over several books including Lives of the Prophets full of mysterious illustrations as well as De Haemorrhoidibus an interesting though controversial medical treatise. The witcher pushed aside volumes and pulled at the dress impatiently. Fringilla eagerly raised her hips.
Something pushed against her shoulder. She turned her head. Learning the Art of Midwifery. Quickly so as not to tempt the devil she looked in the other direction. The Sulphurous Hot Springs. In fact it was getting warmer. From the corner of her eye she saw an open book which rested by her head. Reflections on Inevitable Death. Even better she thought.
The witcher struggled with her panties. She raised her hips but this time only slightly so that it looked like a random movement and not defiant help. She did not know him and did not know to respond. Whether he prefers that a woman knows what she wants or does he like a woman who pretends she doesnt know. And if he would be discouraged by panties that offered resistance.
The witcher however seemed to show no signs of discouragement. You could say the contrary. Seeing that it was time Fringilla eagerly spread her legs bringing down books and pamphlets stacked in piles which poured over them like an avalanche. A heavy leather bound copy of Mortgage Law painfully struck her in the ribs and the Codex Diphmaticus adorned with brass fittings fell on Geralts wrist. Geralt assessed and took advantage of the situation – placing the large tome where it was necessary. Fringilla squeaked because the fittings were cold. But only for a moment.
She gasped loudly letting go of the witchers hair and throwing her hands out grasping both hands into the surrounding books he left hand hold a book on geometry and her right hold a book about reptiles and amphibians. Geralt who held her by the hips unwittingly knocked over another pile of books he was too preoccupied to worry about the pages that rained down on them.
Fringilla moaned uncontrollably her head buried into the book Reflections on Inevitable Death.
Fringilla moaned again. The witcher did not hear it because her thighs were tightly squeezing his ears. He knocked over The History of Wars and Sciences Needed for a Happy Life. He fought with the buttons and hooks of her dress inadvertently reading the inscriptions on covers and spines of books. At the level of Fringillas waist lay Breeding Animals in close proximity to her lovely breasts was a hard critical publication about useless and corrupt civil servants and below that an economic study called Economics and Science – How to create distribute and consume wealth.
Shelves swayed and columns of books collapsed like rocks in a strong earthquake. With a thud from the shelf fell a first edition copy of De Larvis Scenicis et figuris comicis followed by a conventional and well-known book about inventory release and commands of training troops and a book on the Heraldry of Jan de Attire adorned with the beautiful engravings.
The witcher moaned dropping more volumes to the floor with a kick from his leg.
Fringilla leaned back and cried out hitting with her heel a pile of books. A copy of Reflections and Meditations for Every Day of the Year an anonymous and interesting work somehow appeared on Geralts back.
Geralt read over her shoulder finding out whether he wanted to or not notes that had been written by a doctor named Albertus Rivus in a book called Academia Cintensis printed by the master typographer Johann Froben Junior in the second year of the reign of His Majesty King Corbertt.
Suddenly there was a silence in which only the faint sound of rustling pages could be heard.
What should I do Fringilla wondered lightly touching the hard edges of Geralts side and a copy of the Reflections on the Nature of Things. Make a suggestion? Or wait for him to make a suggestion? What would he think of me? But what if he doesnt make a suggestion?
Lets find a bed the witcher solved her dilemma. Its not right to treat books this way.
We found a bed Geralt remembered he rode straight into an alley and with a kick spurred Roach into a gallop. We found the bed in her chambers in the alcove. We made love to each other as if obsessed eagerly greedily as if after years of celibacy and as if celibacy was threatening again.
We talked of many things. We told about ourselves very trivial truths. We told ourselves very beautiful lies. But those lies even though they were lies were not meant to be calculated or to deceive.
With a strong kick he forced Roach into a gallop directly towards a clump of roses covered by snow and forced her to jump.
We made love. And we talked. And our lies were becoming more beautiful and increasingly false.
Two months. From October to Yule.
Two months of furious greedy violent love.
Roachs horseshoes clattered on the palace courtyard of Beauclair.
Quickly and quietly he walked through the corridors. No one saw him or heard him.
Neither the Guardsmen quenching their boredom with chatter or the tired butlers. He did not even make the candle flames waver as he passed by them.
He walked around the castle kitchens. But he did not stop or go in to join his companions who at this late hour had developed a taste for a jug of wine and something to eat. He stood in the darkness and listened.
Angoulême was speaking.
This city is under a spell all of Toussaint. A charm that hangs over the whole valley. And now on this particular palace. I wondered about Dandelion I wondered about Geralt but now it makes me kind of dizzy to be here and I feel a strange tingling… Ive even found myself… Fuck what did I tell you! We have to get out of here as quickly as possible!
We must talk to Geralt muttered Milva. We must talk to him.
Yes talk to him Cahir said sarcastically in one of those rare moments where he is available. Hunting witches and monsters are the only activities that he has performed in the last two months.
And you Angoulême snorted can only be caught while walking in the park playing with the baronesses. This is what happens in spell-bound Toussaint. Regis vanishes at night; my aunty had her Baron…
Shut up brat! And dont call me your aunty!
Come come! Regis stepped between the two ladies. Girls be at peace. Milva Angoulême dont argue. Hostility ruins friendship builds. It is said that Her Ladyship the Duchess likes Dandelion her country the palace bread and pickles. Would you like some wine?
Milva released a heavy sigh.
We have been here too long! Too long I tell you sitting here in idleness. Fooling around.
Nicely put said Cahir. Very nice.
Geralt carefully moved away. As noiselessly as a bat.
Quickly and silently he walked down the corridors. No one saw or heard him. Neither the guards nor the valets. Not even the candle flames flickered as he passes the chandeliers. A rat heard him and poked out its bearded nose. But it was not scared. He was known here.
He went this way often.
The bedroom smelled of spells amber rose and a woman sleeping. But Fringilla was not asleep. She sat on the bed and tossed back the covers; the sight charmed him and made him lose control.
Youve finally arrived she said stretching. Undress and come here quickly. Very very quickly.
She went through the halls quickly and quietly. No one saw or heard her. Neither the soldiers who gossiped lazily with the guards or the footmen or the pages. Not even the candle flames flickered as she passed the chandeliers. A rat heard her and lifted up its hairy nose and followed her with its beady eyes. But it was not frightened. She was known here.
She passed this way often.
In the castle of Beauclair was a secret passage behind a door at the end of a chamber which nobody knew about. Neither the current lady of the castle the Duchess Anarietta nor her ancestor Ademarta First Lady of the Castle. Neither the famous architect Pierre Faramond who renovated the building from top to bottom nor the master masons who worked on Faramonds project. The existence of the passage was not even known by the Chamberlain Le Goff who was thought to know everything about Beauclair.
The passage and the room masked by a powerful illusion were only known by the castles builders – Elves. Later when the elves left the castle and were replaced by people only a handful knew about the secret which was guarded closely by a small group of wizards from the princely family. Most knowledgeable of them all was Master of the Arcane Artorios Vigo a respected specialist in all kinds of illusion whose young niece Fringilla inherited her uncles talent and also became a witch.
Fringilla stopped in front of a bare wall between two columns decorated with a floral motif. With a whisper and a quick gesture a false wall disappeared. Beyond was revealed a corridor which seemingly led to a dead end. At the end of the corridor however was another door masked by illusion. And behind this door was a dark room.
Fringilla entered and without wasting time started the tele-communicator. Oval mirrors which had stood dark started to brighten up the dark room. Through the mirror was revealed a hall in which sat a round table surrounded by women. Nine women.
We are listening Fringilla said Philippa Eilhart. Do you have any news?
Unfortunately not replied Fringilla. Nothing since the last report. Nothing from any attempt at scanning.
This is bad said Philippa. We expected you to find something. Tell us has the witcher calmed down at least? Can you keep him in Toussaint until May?
Fringilla was silent for a moment. She had not the slightest intention of telling the lodge that during the last two weeks the witcher had called her Yennefer twice – and at times when she had every right to be called by her own name. However the lodge had a right to expect from her the truth. Sincerity. And some useful findings.
No she said at last. Probably not until May. But I will do everything in my power to keep him as long as possible.
Korr a monster from the species-rich family of Strigiformes (qv) depending on the area also called Kourican Korreds Rutterkin Rumpelstiltskin Whirlers or Mesmers. You can say one thing about it - that it is a fiend beyond compare. Such devilishly filthy and abhorrent carrion is it that we will neither remember nor write of its customs or even its appearance for verily we say unto you: Any word is too good for this son of a bitch.
Physiologus
CHAPTER FOUR
The smell in the great pillared hall of Castle Montecalvo was a mix of old tapestries smoky candles and ten different kinds of perfume - ten specially compiled types of perfume that were used by the ten women around the oak table seated in chairs with arms carved in the shape of sphinxes.
Opposite Fringilla Vigo sat Triss Merigold in a bright blue high-necked dress. Next to Triss sat Keira Metz who remained in the shadows. Her large earrings held faceted citrines that flashed again and again with a thousand twinkles attracting the eye.
Please continue Miss Vigo urged Philippa Eilhart. We are in a hurry to hear the end of your story. And to take urgent steps.
Philippa was - for once - not wearing any jewellery except a large cameo made of sardonyx that was fastened to her vermilion dress. Fringilla had heard the rumours already she knew who had given her the cameo and whose profile it represented.
Seated next to Philippa was Sile de Tancarville in a dress of all black that sparkled with little diamonds. Margarita Laux-Antille wore burgundy coloured satin and thick gold without stones. Sabrina Glevissig on the other hand displayed a necklace earrings and her beloved finger rings - the onyx colour matched her eyes and clothing.
Closest to Fringilla were the two elves - Francesca Findabair and Ida Emean aep Sivney. The Daisy of the Valley usually looked regal but today exceptionally so. Though neither her hair nor crimson gown displayed excessive pomp and her little tiara and necklace were made not of rubies but modest yet tasteful shells. Ida Emean however wore a dress of muslin and chiffon which was decorated in autumnal shades and so fine and light that it waved around in the hardly noticeable breath of air the central heating produced like an anemone.
Assire var Anahid aroused admiration as usual in recent times with her modest but distinguished elegance. Over the small narrow neckline of her dark-green dress the Nilfgaardian sorceress wore a gold chain and a single gold framed emerald cabochon. Her manicured nails which were painted a very dark green gave the composition a truly magical touch of extravagance.
We are waiting Miss Vigo Sile de Tancarville said. Time is short.
Fringilla cleared her throat. December came she continued. Then Yule then the New Year. The witcher calmed down to the point where Ciris name no longer showed up in every conversation. The monster hunting expeditions which he regularly undertook seemed to completely avail him. Well maybe not completely…
She trailed off. She thought she had seen Triss Merigolds blue eyes flash with hatred. But perhaps it had just been a reflection of the flickering candle flames. Philippa snorted and played with her cameo.
Please there is no need for so much modesty Miss Vigo. Here you are among us. Among women who know that sex acts have purposes other than pleasure. We all use these means when necessary. Please continue.
Even though he maintained the appearance of reticence patience and pride during the daytime continued Fringilla at night he was completely under my power. He told me everything. He paid homage to my femininity and extremely vigorously for his age I must confess. And then he fell asleep. In my arms with his lips on my breast. Looking for a replacement for the mothers love that he had never experienced.
This time she was sure it was not a reflection of the candle flame. Very well. Envy me if you please she thought. Envy me. You have every reason to do so.
He was she repeated completely under my power.
Come back to bed Geralt. It is not even properly bright damn it!
I have an appointment. I have to ride to Pomerol.
I do not want you to ride to Pomerol.
I have an appointment. Ive given my word. The steward of the estate will be waiting for me at the gate.
Your monster hunts are foolish and pointless. What do you want to prove by killing another monster from some cave? Your manhood? I know a better way. Come on back to bed. Do not you ride to Pomerol. At least not so soon. The steward can wait is that not what stewards do? I want to make love to you.
Forgive me. I do not have time. I have given my word.
I want to make love to you!
If you want to keep me company at breakfast put something on.
You probably dont love me any more Geralt. Do you love me? Answer me!
Wear that pearl-gray dress with the mink trim. It suits you very well.
He was completely under my spell fulfilled my every wish repeated Fringilla. He did everything I asked of him. It was so.
We believe it was so said Sile de Tancarville extremely dryly. Please continue.
Fringilla coughed into her fist. The problem she continued was his companions. The strange band that he named his company. Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach who had seen me before and tormented himself to remember where. But he could not remember because when I was last in Darn Dyffra the ancestral home of his family he was six or seven years old. Milva who seemed to be a daredevil and proud girl but who I twice caught hiding in a corner of the stables and crying. Angoulême a moody child. And Regis Terzieff-Godefroy. One type that I could not see through. The whole company had an influence on the witcher one which I could not stop.
Well well she thought Look at them draw up their eyebrows. Look at them twist their mouths. Just wait. This is not the end of my story. You will hear of my triumph.
Every morning she continued this whole company met in the kitchen which was located in the basement of the palace of Beauclair. The chef liked them - who knows why. He always had something in store for them so plentiful and so tasty that breakfast was usually two sometimes even three hours long. I ate with them many times alongside Geralt. So I know what kind of absurd conversations they used to hold.
Two chickens walked around the kitchen one black and the other colourful gently scratching the floor with their clawed feet. They blinked at the breakfast company and picked up crumbs from the floor.
Like every other morning the company had gathered in the palace kitchen. The chef liked them who knows why and he always had something tasty for them. Today there were scrambled eggs flour soup stewed eggplant rabbit pate and veal sausages with red beets and goat cheese to top it all off. All of it was excellent and they ate quickly and quietly. Apart from Angoulême who only whetted her tongue.
Im telling you we should open a brothel here. After weve done what we need to do we should come back here and set up a House of Pleasure. Ive had a look around the city. They have everything. I counted nine barbers alone and eight pharmacies. But they only have one whorehouse and its so small and shitty that I wouldnt even call it a whorehouse. No competition. Well make it a luxurious brothel. Buy a multi-storey house with garden…
Angoulême have mercy.
… exclusively for wealthy customers. I will be the Madame. Im telling you we will make the big money and live like the great masters. In the end I will eventually be elected to the council and then I will certainly not forget about you because if they elect me they elect you and before you can provide yourselves…
Angoulême please. Here eat some bread with pate.
For a moment there was silence.
What are you hunting today Geralt? Hard work?
Eye witnesses - the witcher looked at his plate - give conflicting descriptions. So it depends on whether it is a Molding which is pretty hard work or a Delichon which is moderate or Dudel which is easy. Perhaps the work will even be too easy because the last time the monster was seen was last years Lammas. It may have absconded from Pomerol over the mountains.
If so I wish him all the best said Fringilla while gnawing on a goose bone.
What is up with Dandelion? The witcher said suddenly I havent seen him for so long that I draw all my knowledge of his activities from the satirical songs they sing in the city.
We know no more than you. Regis smiled with his mouth closed. All we know is that our poet is on such familiar terms with the Princess Anarietta that he grants her even in the presence of witnesses a fairly familiar cognomen. He calls her his Little Weasel.
And hes right! Angoulême said with her mouth full. That princess woman actually does kind of have a weasel nose. Not to mention all those teeth.
Fringilla narrowed her eyes. No one is perfect.
Forsooth.
The chickens one black and the other colourful had become so bold that they began to peck at Milvas boots. The Archer swore and knocked them away with a powerful kick.
Geralt watched her for a long time. Then he decided. Maria he said gravely almost sternly. I know that our conversations are not particularly serious and that jokes are not ordained. But you do not need to show us such a sour face. What is wrong?
Its clear whats wrong said Angoulême. Geralt silenced her with a sharp look. Too late.
What the hell do you know then eh? Milva stood up abruptly almost overturning her chair. Damn you! You can kiss my ass all of you you understand me?
She grabbed her cup from the table drank it and then threw it to the floor without hesitation.
Then she ran out of the room and slammed the door.
This is serious… Angoulême began after a moment but this time the vampire silenced her.
The matter is very serious he confirmed. I would not however have expected such an extreme reaction from our archer. Such as one typically reacts when they get split up with not when they do the splitting.
What are you talking about damn it? Asked Geralt unnerved. Hey? Would someone mind telling me what this is about?
The Baron Amadis de Trastamara.
The pockmarked hunter?
The very same. He made a request of Milva. To join him on a three day hunt. He has invited her again and again for months…
The hunt - Angoulême brazenly flashed her teeth - lasted two days. With overnight accommodations in a little hunting lodge you know what I mean? I put my hand…
Be quiet girl. Tell me Regis.
He has formally and solemnly asked for her hand. Milva has rejected apparently in fairly strong terms. The Baron with the reason of youth took her rejection to heart was offended and left Beauclair immediately. Milva has been running around ever since like she was poisoned.
Weve been sitting here too long muttered the witcher. Too long.
And who says this? The previously silent Cahir spoke up. Who says this?
Excuse me. The witcher stood up. Lets talk about it when I get back. The steward of the Pomerol estate is expecting me. And punctuality is the courtesy of the witcher.
After Milvas stormy departure and after the witcher had also left the rest of the company ate breakfast in silence. The two chickens ran around in the kitchen one black and the other colourful gently scratching the floor with their clawed feet.
I Angoulême finally broke the silence as she lifted and passed a plate of toast to Fringilla I have got a problem.
The sorceress nodded. I understand. It will be okay. How long ago did you have your last menstrual period?
What makes you say that? Angoulême stiffened with a jerk that startled the chickens. Nothing like that! Its about something completely different!
So go on.
Geralt wants to leave me here when he sets off again.
Whoa.
He says snorted Angoulême that he cannot bring me into danger or some such nonsense. But I want to go with him…
Whoa.
Dont interrupt me okay? I want to go with him with Geralt because with him Im not afraid of being caught by the One-Eyed Fulk again and here in Toussaint…
Angoulême Regis interrupted her. You are speaking in vain. Miss Vigo will listen to you but she will do nothing about it. Only one thing youve said upsets her: the departure of the witcher.
Whoa. Repeated Fringilla turning to face him and narrowing her eyes. Is that your favourite subject to allude to Mr. Terzieff-Godefroy? The departure of the witcher? And when is he departing? May I ask that?
Maybe not today or tomorrow the vampire replied in a soft voice. But certainly one day. Without hurting anyone.
I am not hurt Fringilla parried coldly. Assuming of course that you had me in mind. But what concerns you Angoulême also concerns me. So I assure you that I will discuss the issue of leaving Toussaint with Geralt. I guarantee that the witcher will know my opinion on this matter.
Yes of course you will snorted Cahir. How did I know that you would say just that Miss Fringilla.
The sorceress looked at him for a long time.
The witcher she finally said should not leave Toussaint. And no one who is well disposed towards him should persuade him to leave. Where could he go that is better than here? He swims in luxury. He has his monsters which he hunts earning quite a bit of money. His friend and companion is the favourite of the ruling Princess here and the Princess herself also values him. Mainly because of the succubus that had plagued the alcoves. Yes yes gentlemen. Anarietta and all the well-born ladies of Toussaint are extremely pleased with the witcher. Because the succubus has indeed stopped its visits as if cut off. The ladies of Toussaint have also put together a special bonus that will be deposited into the witchers account with the Cianfanelli Bank in the near future. And multiply the small fortune that he already has there.
A very nice gesture on the part of the ladies. Regis did not lower his eyes. And the reward is well deserved. It is not easy to cause a succubus to stop its visits. Trust me Miss Fringilla.
Oh I believe you. Speaking of which are you aware that one of the palace guards claims he saw the succubus. At night on the battlements of the Karoberta Tower. In the company of another ghost. Probably a vampire. Both demons were walking there swears the guard and they seemed friendly. Perhaps you know something of it Mr. Regis? Can you explain it?
No. Regis did not flinch. I cannot. There are things between the heavens and earth that even philosophers cannot dream of.
Undoubtedly there are such things Fringilla confirmed with a nod of her black-haired head. But with regards to the fact that the witcher is supposedly ready to leave - you must know more than me? Because you see he has not mentioned any such thing to me and he usually tells me everything.
Sure muttered Cahir.
Fringilla ignored him. Mr. Regis?
No the vampire said after a short silence. No Miss Fringilla please rest assured. The witcher by no means gives us more affection and confidence than you. He does not whisper any secrets into our ears that he would hide from you.
How then - Fringilla was quiet as granite - can you make these declarations about his departure?
Once again the vampire did not flinch. Because it is like the youthful charm filled expression of our lovely Angoulême says: Eventually there comes a time when you either have to shit or get off the toilet. In other words…
Dont bother with the other words Fringilla interrupted him sharply It was charming enough already.
For a while there was silence. Both chickens the black and colourful walked around and pecked at what was left. Angoulême wiped a smudge of red beet from her nose with her sleeve. The vampire played thoughtfully with a sausage link.
Thanks to me Fringilla finally broke the silence Geralt has learned what few people know - Ciris family tree and the secrets of its origin. Thanks to me he knows these things that he had no idea about a year ago. Thanks to me he has information and information is a weapon. Thanks to me and my protection from magical detection he is protected from the enemy including assassins. Thanks to me his knee no longer hurts and can bend again. Around his neck he wears a medallion of my craftsmanship which might not be as good as his original witchers medallion but nevertheless… Thanks to me and only me he is ready for the spring and summer - he is informed fed healthy and prepared to fight the enemy. If anyone of you here has done more for Geralt given more to him then he should say so. Ill willingly pay him tribute.
No one spoke up. The chickens pecked at Cahirs boots but the young Nilfgaardian ignored them.
Indeed he said pointedly none of us has given more to Geralt than you my lady.
How did I know that you would say just that?
Its not about that Miss Fringilla the vampire began. The sorceress did not let him.
Whats it about then? She asked aggressively. About the fact that he and I are together? About the fact that we have an emotional connection? About the fact that I do not want him to leave now? That I do not want him to decide based on guilt? The same feelings of guilt and atonement that drive you to depart?
Regis was silent. Cahir also said nothing. Angoulême looked around; she had obviously not understood much.
If it is written in the books of providence the sorceress said after a while that Geralt will find Ciri then it will happen. Regardless of whether the witcher sets off into the mountains or sits in Toussaint. Predestination overtakes humans. Not vice versa. Do you understand that? Do you understand Mr. Regis Terzieff-Godefroy?
Better than you think Miss Vigo. The vampire turned the sausage link in his fingers. However you must excuse me I do not accept that predestination is in some book written by the hand of a great Demiurge or the will of heaven or the unalterable judgment of any providence. Rather it is the result of many seemingly unconnected facts events and actions. I tend to agree with you that the predestination overtakes humans… and not only humans. However I accept much less the view that it could not also be reversed. Because this view is a convenient fatalism. It is a paean to apathy and baseness on a feather bed and the charming warmth of a womans womb. In short to live in a dream. Life Miss Vigo may be a dream may end in a dream… But its a dream that you must actively dream. Therefore Miss Vigo the road awaits us.
Go ahead. Fringilla stood up almost as violent as Milva had recently. As you wish! Snow cold and predetermination await you on the passes. And the atonement that you so urgently seem to need. Go ahead! But the witcher is staying here. In Toussaint! With me!
I believe the vampire replied calmly You are mistaken Miss Vigo. The dream you dream with the witcher is I confess with a bow magical and beautiful. However any dream that we dream for too long becomes a nightmare. And from it we awake with a scream.
The nine women who were seated at the large table in Castle Montecalvo stared fixedly at Fringilla Vigo. At Fringilla who had suddenly begun to stutter.
Geralt rode on the morning of January eighth to the Pomerol estate. And he came back… well… on the eighth night or on the ninth morning… I do not know… Im not sure…
Keep it together Sile de Tancarville gently requested. Please keep it together Miss Vigo. And if any detail of the story is too embarrassing then just move on.
The colourful chicken ran around the kitchen gently scratching the floor with its clawed feet.
It smelled broth.
The door opened with a bang. Geralt stormed into the kitchen. His windswept face displayed a blue bruise and purplish-black stripes of dried blood.
Come on people pack up he announced without any unnecessary preliminaries. Were leaving! In one hour and not a moment later I will see you all on the hill outside the city where the column stands. With bags and baggage in the saddle ready for a long and difficult path.
That was enough. It was as if they had been waiting for this message and had been ready for a long time.
Immediately Milva cried jumping up. Ill be done in half an hour!
Me too. Cahir let his spoon fall stood up and looked at the witcher carefully. But Id like to know what this is. A whim? A lovers quarrel? Or are we truly leaving?
Really. Angoulême why are you making that face?
Geralt I…
Dont worry. Im not leaving you behind. Ive changed my mind. But you must be careful brat; you must not leave my sight. Go on I said grab your saddlebags and pack. And individually in order not to attract attention from the city to the column on the hill. We meet there in one hour.
Absolutely Geralt exclaimed Angoulême. Damn finally!
In no time Geralt and the colourful chicken were all that remained in the kitchen. And the vampire who was quietly stirring his broth with noodles.
Are you waiting for a special invitation? Asked the witcher coldly. Why are you still sitting here? Instead of packing the mule Draakula? And saying goodbye to the succubus?
Geralt Regis said calmly taking a spoonful of soup from the tureen. It will take me just as long to part with the succubus as it will for you to part with your black-haired girl. Assuming that you intend to say goodbye to her. But just between you and me: you can send the young people out to pack up their things with shouting and noise but I deserve something more for reasons of age. Please grant me a few words of explanation.
Regis…
A statement Geralt. The sooner you start the better. Ill help you. Yesterday morning you met the steward of the Pomerol Winery at the city gate as agreed…
Alcides Fierabras the black-bearded steward of the Pomerol Winery who the witcher had met in the Pheasantry on the night before Yule was waiting at the city gate with a mule; He however was dressed and equipped as they were travelling far far away to the end the world beyond the Solveiga Gate and the Elskerdeg Pass.
It really is not close he replied to a snappy remark Geralt had made. You sir come from the big wide world and think of our small Toussaint as a little hamlet; you think you could throw a hat from one boundary to the other. But you are wrong. The Pomerol Vineyard where we indeed want to go is a good ways away and we can be happy if we are there by lunch.
Perhaps the witcher said dryly we shouldnt have arranged to leave so late.
Yeah maybe. Alcides Fierabras stared at him and blew into his moustache. But I didnt know you were one of the early birds. Because that is rare in nobles.
Im not a noble. Lets be on our way sir we neednt lose any time in idle talk.
You took the words right out of my mouth.
They rode through the city to shorten the path. Geralt initially wanted to protest - he was afraid of getting stuck in the crowded streets known to him. However the steward Fierabras as it turned out knew both the city better and the days when there was no crowding on the streets. They rode easily and quickly.
They rode into the market and passed the scaffold. And the gallows decorated by a hanging body.
Its a dangerous thing - the steward pointed out with a nod – to forge rhymes and sing ditties. Especially in public.
Severe. Geralt instantly recognized what he meant. In other places the maximum penalty for libel is the pillory.
It depends on whom the libel is about and if it is true said Alcides Fierabras soberly. And how it was rhymed. Our princess is kind woman and is loved by the people but if someone provokes her…
Songs as one of my friends likes to say you cannot suffocate.
Songs you cannot suffocate. But the singer you can suffocate perfectly well.
They crossed the city and rode out the Coopers Gate straight into the valley of the Blessure River which cheerfully splashed and foamed in rapids. On the fields snow lay only in gullies and depressions but it was quite cold.
A troop of knights passed them certainly on their way to Cervantes Pass to the border fortress of Vedette. The front of their shields and coats were very colourfully painted and embroidered with griffins lions hearts lilies stars crosses and other heraldic nonsense.
Their hooves thundered their banners fluttered and their powerful voices sung an idiotic song about a thing or two that happens to a knight when he is awarded a bride.
Geralt followed the party with his eyes. The sight of the knight-errants left him thinking of Reynart de Bois-Fresnes who had just returned home from the service and was restoring his strength in the arms of his middle-class woman. Her husband a merchant hadnt returned home for days probably held back by foaming rivers forests full of wildlife and other natural forces. The witcher could by no means imagine tearing Reynart from the arms of his mistress but he honestly regretted that the contract with the Pomerol Winery wasnt set on a later date. He liked the knight and missed his company.
Lets ride Mr. Witcher.
Lets ride Mr. Fierabras.
They followed the road up the river. The Blessure River twisted and meandered but there were plenty of bridges so they didnt need to make any detours.
Steam rose from the nostrils of the horses and the mule.
Do you think the winter will last long Mr. Fierabras?
There was frost on Saovine. And the saying goes: Frost on Saovine – better put your warm pants on.
I see. And your vines? Doesnt the cold harm them?
Its been colder.
They rode on in silence.
Look there Fierabras pointed. There in the valley lies the village of Fox Hollow. Its hard to believe but their fields grow pots and pans.
What?
Pots and pans. They arise from the bosom of the earth of course entirely naturally with no human intervention. Pots and pans grow in Fox Hollow as potatoes or beets grow elsewhere. All kinds and shapes.
Really?
May I drop dead if its not true. Thats why Fox Hollow established a partnership with the village of Dudno in Maecht. For there the earth blossoms with lids.
All kinds and shapes?
You Mr. Witcher hit the mark.
They rode on. Silently. The Blessure River roared and foamed over the stones.
And look there Mr. Witcher. Those are the ruins of the ancient fortress of Dun Tynne. That castle has witnessed terrible things if you believe the legend. Waltharius called the Heavy Handed tortured and viciously murdered his unfaithful wife her lover her mother her sister and her brother. And then he sat down and cried no one knows why…
Ive heard of it.
Have you been there then?
No.
Ha. The legend has travelled far and wide.
You Mr. Steward hit the mark.
And there - the witcher pointed - the pretty little tower behind the terrible castle? What is that?
That? That is a temple.
For what god?
Who remembers a thing like that.
Indeed. Who does nowadays.
Around noon they saw the winery. It was situated on the slopes of the valley of the Blessure River and covered by evenly cropped vines now wizened and bald. On the summit of the highest hill windswept towers rose towards the sky belonging to the thick and round Castle Pomerol.
Geralt noted with interest that the path leading to the castle was churned up by hooves and carriage wheels just as much as the highway. It was clear someone had been heavily using the road to the castle. He bit back his curiosity up to the moment that he saw a dozen huge robust canvas-covered wagons like those used for long distance transport.
Merchants said the steward in reply to his question. Wine merchants.
Merchants? Geralt was surprised. How so? I thought the mountain passes are blocked by snow and Toussaint is cut off from the outside world. So how have the merchants reached here?
For merchants the steward Fierabras said profoundly there are no blocked passes or bad roads - at least not for those who take their job seriously. They Mr. Witcher have such a principle: When a goal beckons a way must be found.
Indeed Geralt said slowly an admirable principle one which we should emulate. In all situations.
Without a doubt. But in truth the fact of the matter is that some of the merchants have been stuck here since fall and cannot get out. But they dont hang their heads; they say Pah now we will be the first ones here in the spring before the competition shows up They call this principle: positive thinking.
Geralt nodded. One can hardly object to this principle. Though one thing still amazes me Mr. Steward. Why are these merchants sitting out here and not in Beauclair? Is the princess not willing to grant them the right to hospitality? Does she perhaps have something against these merchants?
Not at all replied Fierabras. The princess increasingly extends invitations to them and they increasingly and politely reject them. And stay at the winery.
Why?
They say that Beauclair is home to perpetual banquets balls feasts revelry and flirtation. They say those activities are just lazy stupid and a waste of time that could be spent thinking about business. They say you have to focus on what is really important. On the goal that beckons you constantly. Incessantly. Without wasting any thoughts on frippery. Then and only then can you reach your goal.
Truly Mr. Fierabras the witcher said slowly. Im thankful for our common journey. Our conversations were very beneficial to me. Really.
Contrary to the expectations of the witcher they rode not to Castle Pomerol but a little further onto the ridge behind the valley where the next castle stood a little smaller and much more neglected. This was Castle Zurbarràn. Geralt was looking forward to the prospect of getting to do something soon because the dark serrated battlements of ruined Zurbarràn looked like a textbook example of a haunted ruin which was no doubt swarming with magic marvels and monsters.
When they reached the courtyard however instead of marvels and monsters he saw a dozen people at such magical pursuits as rolling barrels planing boards and nailing these boards together. It smelled of fresh wood fresh mortar a few less fresh cats sour wine and pea soup. The pea soup was served immediately.
The wind and cold during their journey had made them hungry and they ate quickly and silently. One of Steward Fierabras subordinates in the company made it for them. It was served by two light-haired girls with braids a good three feet long. Both stared at the witcher so provocatively that he decided to eat as quickly as possible and get to work.
Simon Gilka had not seen the monster. He knew its appearance exclusively from second hand stories.
It was black ha pitch black and when it crawled across the wall you could see the bricks through it. It was like a jelly you know what I mean Mr. Witcher or maybe something like a glob of snot. But it had long legs and a lot of them eight or even more. And Yontek stood there stood there and watched until he finally wised up and screamed Get away Get yourself away! And an exorcism too: Thee shalt croak you son of a bitch! And then the monster went darting! Whoosh whoosh up and away. Into the depths of the abyss and was gone. And the boys says: If theres a monster here we want hazard pay and if we dont get it well complain to our union. Your union I tell them can go and…
When interrupted Geralt was the monster was last seen?
Three weeks ago. So just before Yule.
The witcher looked at the steward. You told me it hasnt been seen since Lammas.
Alcides Fierabras blushed at the points that werent covered by his beard.
Gilka snorted. Well well Mr. Steward if you want to manage you have to be around more often you cant just sit at the office in Beauclair polishing the chairs with your butt. I think…
Im not interested Fierabras cut him off fiercely in what you think. Tell the story of the monster.
Ive already told it. Thats all there was.
There have been no victims? No one has been attacked?
No. But last year a servant disappeared without a trace. Some said the monster dragged him to the depths and killed him. Others said that it certainly wasnt any monster but that the servant had killed himself because of debts and payments. The fact is that he played dice like the devil and then he had a child with the millers daughter and she has since gone to court and the court ordered the servant to make support payments…
So Geralt interrupted the monster hasnt attacked anyone? And no one has seen it since?
No.
One of the local girls pouring wine brushed Geralts ear with her breast and winked encouragingly.
Lets go Geralt said quickly. Theres no reason to dawdle and talk. Lead me to the cellar.
Unfortunately it turned out that Fringillas amulet could not fulfil the hopes he had placed in it. Geralt had not believed for a moment that the polished chrysoprase could replace his silver witchers wolf medallion. Fringilla had not promised anything like that at all. However she had assured him - with great conviction - that the amulet once attuned to the mind of the wearer could do different things including warning the wearer of danger.
But either Fringillas magic had failed or Geralt and the amulet had different views of what was dangerous and what was not. On his way to the cellar the chrysoprase shrugged almost imperceptibly when a large orange cat ran in front of him lifted its tail rebelliously and defiled the yard. The cat must have received some signal from the amulet because it jumped away and gave a penetrating meow.
But when the witcher entered the cellar the medallion started vibrating annoyingly over and over in the dry neat clean storage rooms where the only danger emanated from the large wine casks. Someone who lay down with no self-control and his mouth open under the casket might have been threatened with severe intoxication. But nothing more.
On the other hand the medallion did not flinch when Geralt left the still used part of the cellar descended the stairs and entered the long deep tunnels. The witcher had long since realized that most of the vineyards of Toussaint had old mines below them. No doubt as the planted vines began to bear fruit and yield better profits the exploitation of mines had been abandoned to create tunnels and corridors that could be used as wine cellars. The castles Pomerol and Zurbarràn stood on top of an old slate mine. It was swarming with tunnels and holes; it would only take a moments inattention to end up at the bottom of a hole with broken bones. Some of the holes were covered by rotten boards that were so thoroughly coated in layers of shale dust that they were indistinguishable from the ground. The area was very dangerous so he needed the medallion to warn him. It didnt.
It didnt even warn him when an indistinct gray figure jumped out from a pile of slate rubble ten steps in front of Geralt kicked up dust with its claws and wildly wringing legs gave a piercing wail ran down the tunnel whistling and giggling and disappeared into a gaping hole in the wall.
The witcher cursed. The magic trinket reacted to orange cats but it didnt respond to Gremlins. Ill have to talk with Fringilla about it he thought as he walked towards the hole where the little creature had disappeared.
The amulet twitched vigorously.
A bit late he thought. But immediately afterwards he thought better of it. Perhaps the medallion was not so stupid. The usual tactic of Gremlins was to flee and then ambush their pursuers with a blow from its sickle-sharp claws. The Gremlin waiting in the dark - that was what the medallion signalled.
He waited and waited holding his breath pricking his ears alert. The amulet was quiet and lifeless on his chest. A dull unpleasant odour emanated from the hole. But it was dead silent.
And no Gremlin would have stayed silent for so long.
Without thinking he ducked into the hole and crawled on all fours scraping his back against the rough rock. He did not travel very far.
Something began to creak and snapped. Then the floor gave way and down fell the witcher -along with several hundred pounds of dust and debris. Luckily he didnt fall for long - it was not a bottomless pit but a normal dungeon. He shot out like shit from the sewer pipe and smashed into a pile of rotten wood. He spit something out shook the dust from his hair and swore very blasphemously. The amulet shook incessantly it trembled on his chest like a sparrow inserted under his shirt. The witcher resisted the impulse to tear it off and throw it away into the darkness never to seen again. First Fringilla would have been furious. Second the chrysoprase was supposed to have other magical properties. Geralt hoped it would be more reliable at the others.
As he started to stand he groped a round skull. And he realized that what he had crashed into was by no means a pile of wood.
He stood up and quickly studied the pile of bones. They were all human. All these people were in chains at the moment of their deaths and had most likely been naked. Their bones were crushed and chewed. They might have already been dead when they were bitten. But he was not sure.
A corridor led out of the tunnel long and straight. The slate wall had been processed very smoothly – it no longer looked like a mine.
It ended suddenly in a huge cavity whose ceiling sank in the obscure darkness. The centre of the cavern was a huge black bottomless pit above which hung a dangerous delicate looking stone bridge.
Water dripped from the walls echoing. A cold stench blew from the abyss. The amulet was quiet. Geralt stepped onto the bridge alert and focused trying to stay away from the crumbling balustrades.
After the bridge came another corridor. On the smooth processed walls he noticed rusted torch brackets. There were also niches here; some were filled with small statues made of sandstone but over the years the dripping water had worn them down to shapeless boulders. Plates and reliefs had also been inserted into the walls. He was able to identify this sturdier material better. Geralt saw a woman with a horned moon a tower a swallow a boar a dolphin and a unicorn.
He heard a voice.
He stopped and held his breath.
The amulet twitched.
No it was no illusion; it wasnt the crunch of slate rubble or the echo of dripping water. It was a human voice. Geralt closed his eyes and strained his hearing. He tried to pinpoint the noise.
The witcher could have sworn that the voice came from the next niche from behind a statue that was worn down but not so much that it had lost the rounded shape of a woman. It stood equal to the height of his medallion. It flashed and Geralt suddenly noticed a reflection in the wall. He vigorously hugged the woman with his arms and sharply turned her. It creaked then the whole niche turned on a steel hinge and revealed a spiral staircase.
The voice sounded again from the top of the stairs. Geralt did not hesitate.
At the top he found a door that opened without any resistance not even squeak. Behind the door was a small room with a vaulted ceiling. Four enormous brass tubes towered on the walls their ends were expanded like trumpets. In the middle between the openings of the tubes stood an armchair and on that armchair sat a skeleton. On its skull slid down to its teeth hung the remains of a beret. Its body carried fragments of once-rich clothes now eaten away. Around its neck hung a gold chain. Its feet rested in high topped boots strongly corroded by rats.
From one of the tubes came a sneeze so loud and unexpected that the witcher almost jumped. Then someone blew their nose and the amplified sound from the brass tube was downright hellish.
Bless you came out of the tube. That was some sneeze Skellen.
Geralt moved the skeleton out of the chair without forgetting to first remove its gold chain and stick it in his pocket. Then he sat down at the listening space. At the opening of the tube.
One of the men Geralt was eavesdropping on had a bass voice deep and booming. When he spoke the brass tube actually vibrated.
That was some sneeze Skellen. Where did you get such a cold? And when?
Not worth talking about said the sneezer. Some damned disease has caught me and adheres. As soon as I get rid of it it comes right back. Not even magic helps.
Maybe you should change magicians? Said the next voice creaking like a rusty hinge. Truly this Vilgefortz cant yet point to any particularly great successes. I think…
Forget it interjected one who stretched his syllables in a characteristic way. That is not the reason we have organized this meeting here in Toussaint. In the middle of nowhere in the ass of the world.
This ass of the world said the sneezer is the only country I know of that does not have its own security service. The only corner of the empire that is not riddled with agents of Vattier de Rideaux. This principality is seen by all as a hilarious and perpetually drunken state operetta which nobody takes seriously.
Such little countries said the syllable stretcher have always been havens for spies and their preferred venues. Therefore they attract counterintelligence service and spies eavesdroppers and all sorts of private detectives.
That may have once been the case. Said the sneezer. But not under the rule of a woman which has lasted for almost one hundred years in Toussaint. I repeat we are safe here. Here no one will track us down or overhear us. We can act as merchants and calmly discuss the questions that are of vital interest for your princely graces. For your personal assets and estates.
Truly I hate private interests! Ranted the creaking. We are not here for personal reasons! I am concerned solely about the good of the Empire. And the good of the Empire gentlemen is in a strong dynasty! Therefore it would be a great evil and harmful for the kingdom if any mongrel any spoiled scion of bad blood ascends the throne a descendant of the physically sick and morally inferior kings. No gentlemen! I a de Wette of the family de Wette will not stand by idly and watch! In addition my daughter was promised…
Your daughter de Wette? Roared the booming bass voice. And what about me? I who at the time supported Emhyr in the fight against the usurper? It was my residence from which the cadets launched their assault on the palace! And what did that earn me! At that time the swindler looked at my little Eilan smiled graciously at her complimented her and took her behind a curtain I know to feel her tits. And now what - another empress! Such an affront? Such shame? The emperor of the eternal empire who prefers the daughters of Cintra to those of the ancient families! What? He sits on the throne by my grace and dares to reject my Eilan? No I will not tolerate it!
Nor I cried another voice high and exalted. He has disrespected me too! Leaving my wife for this Cintran nobody!
By a lucky coincidence said the syllable stretcher the nobody has been promoted into the afterlife. As follows the report of Mr. Skellen.
Ive listened to this report very attentively said the creaky and Ive concluded it follows that the nobody has simply disappeared. And if she has simply disappeared then she may yet reappear. Because she disappeared and reappeared several times last year! Truly Mr. Skellen you have disappointed us. You and your magician this Vilgefortz!
But now is not the right moment Joachim! Said the bass. Now is not the time to blame each other and to accuse to drive wedges between us! We must be strong and united. And determined. Therefore it is unimportant whether the Cintran is alive or not. An emperor who insults the old families with impunity once will continue to do so in the future! The Cintran has disappeared? Then in a few months he can present an empress of Zerrikanian or Sangwebarian origin! No by the Great Sun we cannot let him!
Truly we cannot! Right you are Ardal! Said the creaky. The Emreis dynasty has been a disappointment ever since they took the throne. Each moment Emhyr sits on the throne does the empire harm truly. And there is someone else who could sit the throne. The young Voorhis…
A loud sneeze rang out like a trumpet.
Constitutional monarchy said the sneezer. It is high time for a constitutional monarchy a progressive order. And then democracy… a government of the people…
Emperor Voorhis repeated the bass voice with emphasis. Emperor Voorhis Stefan Skellen. He will be married with my daughter Eilan or with one of Joachims. And then I will be the Chancellor of the Crown and de Wette will be the Field Marshal. And you Stefan -the Foreign Minister and a count. If you abandon your idea of granting titles and offices to the peasants. What?
Forget about historical development the sneezers voice said soothingly. For the moment at least. First let me draw Your Excellency Chancellor aep Dahys attention to the person of Prince Voorhis - mainly the fact that he is a man of iron character proud and stubborn who will be difficult to influence.
If I can make a comment the syllable stretcher came forward to speak. Prince Voorhis has a son the little Morvran. He is a far better candidate. First he has a better claim to the throne both on his fraternal side and maternal side. Second he is a child so the Regency Council will rule in his place. So us.
Nonsense! We will deal with the father! We will find a way! Said the bass.
We push suggested the exalted my wife under him!
Be still Count Broinne. That is not what we are talking about. Said the creaky Gentlemen we should discuss other matters truly. I would like to point out that Emhyr var Emreis still prevails.
Of course agreed the sneezer and trumpeted into his handkerchief. He lives and reigns. He is at his peak both physically and mentally. The latter especially cannot be disputed after he has gotten rid of both your highnesses - along with any troops that would have been faithful to you. How will you accomplish a revolution my Lord Prince Ardal if you have to spend each moment overseeing the Eastern Division of the army in battle? And Prince Joachim will probably have to be with his troops in the Verden Special Operational Group.
Spare me the tips Stefan Skellen. Said the creaky. And pulling that face only makes you look similar to your magician Vilgefortz in your imagination. And you should know Owl that if Emhyr really does get suspicious it will be because of you - you and Vilgefortz. Admit it you tried to catch the Cintran and buy Emhyrs favour with her? Now that the girl is dead you no longer have anything to offer right? Emhyr would quarter you truly. You will not raise your hand against us neither you nor the magician with whom you have allied yourself!
No one of us will raise our hands Joachim put in the bass. We need to look the truth in the face. We are in no better position than Skellen. The circumstances have brought us together. We are all in the same boat now.
But the Owl was the one who put us in this boat! Shouted the creaky. Why do we have to act secretly now? Emhyr knows everything! Vattier de Rideauxs agents search the whole empire for the Owl. And he has gotten rid of us truly sent us to war!
Exactly the syllable stretcher And you should take advantage of that. I can assure you gentlemen everyone is fed up with the war currently underway. The army the common people and especially the merchants and entrepreneurs. The mere fact that the war is over will cause joy throughout the entire empire regardless of how the war ends. Gentlemen military leaders influence the course of the war so if I may say so the end is always within reach. What is easier than to taking credit as heroes for ending an armed conflict in victory? And in case of defeat as men who sent by providence negotiated an end to the bloodshed?
True said the creaking after a while. By the Great Sun that is true. Youre right Mr. Leuvaarden.
Emhyr said the bass wrapped the rope around his neck when he sent us to the front.
Emhyr said the exalted is still alive my lord Prince. He is alive and doing well. We do not want to split the skin of the bear.
No said the bass. Not before we kill the bear.
The silence lasted a long time.
So an assassination attempt. Death.
Death.
Death!
Death. It is the only solution. Emhyr has followers as long as he lives. When Emhyr dies everyone will support us. The aristocracy will side with us because we are part of the aristocracy and the power of the aristocracy lies in solidarity. A significant part of the army will be on our side especially the officer corps who still remember Emhyrs purges after the defeat of Sodden. The people will be on our side…
Because the people are ignorant stupid and easy to manipulate Skellen finished the sentence after he had himself a sneeze. You need only Hurrah! And make a speech from the senate steps promising to open the prisons and cut the taxes.
You are absolutely right Owl said the syllable stretcher. Now I know why you shout so loudly for democracy.
I warn you creaked the man they called Joachim that everything will not go as smoothly as it sounds gentlemen. Our whole plan is based on the death of Emhyr. But we must not close our eyes to the fact that Emhyr has many followers he has the units in the main army and he has a fanatical guard. It will not be easy to pass through the Imperial Guard and strike at the Emperor because have no illusions they will fight to the death.
And here declared Stefan Skellen Vilgefortz offers us his help. We will not have to besiege the palace and we will not have to fight through the Imperial Guard. The thing can be done by a single assassin with magical protection. As in Tretogor just before the mages coup on Thanedd.
King of Radovid of Redania.
Yes.
Vilgefortz has as an assassin?
Yes. To prove our trust gentlemen I will tell you who it is. The sorceress Yennefer who weve imprisoned.
Imprisoned? Ive heard that Yennefer worked with Vilgefortz willingly.
She is his prisoner. Bewitched and hypnotized programmed like a golem she will execute the assassination. Then she will commit suicide.
Some magical witch doesnt quite suit me said the one who extended the syllables extending them even more out of sheer disgust. A hero would be better a blazing champion of an idea an avenger…
An avenger interrupted Skellen. Fits like a glove Mr. Leuvaarden. Yennefer will avenge the suffering that was inflicted by the tyrant. Emhyr has persecuted and driven to death her girl an innocent child. This cruel tyrant this pervert has persecuted and murdered children instead of taking care of empire. Therefore he will be overtaken by the avenging hand…
I announced Ardal aep Dahys bass voice I like it very well.
Me too agreed to Joachim de Wette.
Wonderful! Shouted the eccentric Count Broinne. For the rape of foreign women the avenging hand will overtake the tyrant and pervert. Wonderful!
One more thing said Leuvaarden stretching his syllables. To guarantee your trust Lord Skellen Ill ask you to please betray to us the whereabouts of Mr. Vilgefortz.
Gentlemen I… I cannot…
That is why it would be a guarantee. A pledge of the sincerity and devotion to the cause.
You need not fear betrayal Stefan added aep Dahy. None here will betray you. This is a paradox. In other circumstances someone among us might even try to buy his life by betraying the rest. But all of us know only too well that they would buy nothing with the betrayal. Emhyr var Emreis does not forgive. He cannot. Instead of a heart he has a lump of ice. And therefore all will be killed.
Stefan Skellen no longer hesitated. Okay he said. As a pledge of sincerity. Vilgefortz is hidden at the…
The witcher sat at the opening of the tube and clenched his fists until they hurt. He strained his hearing. And his memory.
The witchers doubts concerning Fringillas amulet were unjustified and vanished in a moment. When he returned the great cavern and approached the stone bridge over the abyss the medallion began to jerk on his neck and struggle not like a sparrow but more like a large and powerful bird. Lets say a crow.
Geralt froze. He calmed the amulet. He did not make the slightest movement so that no rustle not even a breath could deceive his hearing. He waited. He knew that on the other side of the abyss beyond the bridge there was something something that was lurking in the dark.
He did not rule out that it could also be concealed behind his back and that the bridge might be a trap. He was not going to walk into this trap. He waited. And not in vain.
Hail Witcher he heard. We are waiting for you here.
The voice that came out of the darkness sounded strange and alien. But Geralt had heard voices like it more than once he knew them. Thus spoke beings that were not used to communicating with the aid of articulate speech. Although they were able to use the apparatus of the lungs diaphragm trachea and throat these creatures could not use completely the articulation apparatus even though their lips palate and tongues were built very similar to humans. Such beings accentuated their spoken words not only strangely and proudly but also with sounds that are uncomfortable to the human ear - hard and ugly barking or soft and slimy hissing.
We are waiting for you here repeated the voice. We knew that you would come if we fed you with rumours. That you would come crawl under the earth to search to hunt to track to kill. But you will not leave here. You will never again see the sun that is so dear to you.
Show yourself.
In the darkness beyond the bridge something moved. The darkness seemed to aggregate in one place and took on an almost human form. The creature seemed to never remain in the same position or at the same location for a moment; it changed it by using faster more nervous blurred motion. The witcher had seen such creatures before.
A Korr he stated calmly. I should have expected to see the likes of you here. Its a miracle that I didnt find you earlier.
Take a look at you. The unnatural voice of the creature sounded mocking. In the dark and still you recognized me. And do you recognize that? And that? And that?
From the darkness emerged three more creatures silently as ghosts. One who had been hiding behind the Korrs back also had the general shape and appearance of a humanoid but it was more stocky hunched and ape-like. Geralt knew it was a Killmouli.
The other two monsters were hiding as he had correctly guessed behind the bridge ready to cut off his retreat if he had stepped onto the bridge. The first on the left resembled a giant spider it stood in place while flexing its many legs. It was a Molding. The last creature reminded him of a candelabra it liked something that had jumped straight out of the broken slate wall. Geralt could not say what it was. No such monster was recorded in the witcher books.
I want no quarrel with you he said and putting a little hope in the fact that the creatures had begun with conversation rather than just going for his jugular in the dark. I want no quarrel with you. But if it comes to that I will defend myself.
We have taken that into account the Korr said hissing. That is why we are four. That is why we have lured you here. You poison our lives fucking witchers. The most beautiful holes in this part of the world wonderful places to hibernate. Weve spent the winter here almost since the beginning of time. And now you show up here to prey on us you wretch. In order track us hunt us and kill us for money. But no more. Not from you.
Listen Korr…
Politely snarled the creature. I do not tolerate insolence.
So how am I to address you…?
Mr. Schweitzer.
Well Mr. Schweitzer continued Geralt seemingly obedient here is the thing. I have I will not hide it come here as a witcher with a witchers job. I propose to let that subject rest. However something happened in this cave something that has changed the situation diametrically. Ive learned something unusually important for me. Something that can change my whole life.
And what will follow from this?
I need - Geralt was a model of composure and patience - to immediately get to the surface and to immediately set off for a long journey without the slightest delay. A journey from which there might be no return. I do not think I will ever… return to this area…
Trying to buy you your life witcher? Hissed Mr. Schweitzer. No use. You ask in vain. Weve got you in a bind and will not let you out. We will kill you and think not only of ourselves but also of our other comrades. We will kill you if I may say so for both our and their freedom.
Ill not only never come back to this area Geralt continued patiently but will give up all my work as a witcher. I will never kill any of you…
Youre lying! You lie in fear!
But - Geralt could not be interrupted this time - I must as I said get outside immediately. So you have two choices. The first: You believe in my sincerity and I get out of here. The second: I leave behind your corpses.
The third growled the Korr your corpse is left behind.
The witcher removed his sword from the scabbard on his back with a hiss.
It will not be the only one he said unmoved. Certainly not the only one Mr. Schweitzer.
The Korr was silent for a while. The Killmouli who still stood behind his back rocked back and forth and growled a little. The Molding bent and stretched its legs. The Candelabra had changed shape. Now it looked like a crooked little tree with two large phosphorescent eyes.
Give us finally said the Korr proof of your sincerity and your good will.
How?
Your sword. You claim that you will cease to be a witcher. A sword makes a witcher. Throw it into the abyss. Or break it. Then we let you out.
Geralt stood there motionless for a moment only the water dripping from the ceiling and walls broke the silence. Then he slowly placed the sword vertically and deeply into a crevice. And broke the blade with a powerful kick of his boot. The sword burst with a sighing sound that echoed in the depths.
The water dripped from the walls ran them down like tears.
I cannot believe it the Korr said slowly. I cannot believe that someone could be so stupid.
They all rushed at him instantly without a cry or a command. Mr. Schweitzer was the first to over the bridge - with stretched claws and bared fangs which even a wolf would not have been ashamed of.
Geralt approached it whereupon he turned and struck it in the hip the lower cheek and its neck renting its throat. The next moment he was on the bridge and slashed off one of the Killmoulis wrists with a blow. He doubled over and threw himself on the ground just in time because the Candelabra flew over him grazing his jacket with its paws. The Molding jumped in front of witcher thin legs whirling like a windmill. A swipe from one of its paws hit him on the side of the head; Geralt danced made a feint and hit with a sweeping blow.
However the Molding jumped again but missed him. It landed on the railing and he pushed it along with a hail of stones into the abyss. Until then it had not made the slightest sound but now that it fell into the abyss it howled. It was a long time before the howling ceased.
They attacked from two sides - the Candelabra on one and the blood soaked Killmouli on the other which had managed to stand up in spite of its injuries. The witcher jumped on the small stone railing shaking the whole bridge. He balanced out and was now located beyond the reach of the Candelabras clawed paws and behind the Killmouli. The Killmouli had no neck so Geralt gave him a blow to the temple. But the monsters head was like iron so he had to strike a second time to finish it. It took him a split second too long.
He received a blow to the head pain flared in his skull and into his eyes. He spun around covered himself with a large display of defence and felt his blood gushing beneath his hair trying to understand what had happened. After he avoided - miraculously - the second blow of the claws he understood. The Candelabra had changed shape - it now attacked with almost impossibly long legs.
That brought a disadvantage. Namely imbalance and a shifted centre of gravity. The witcher ducked under its feet and shortened the distance. The Candelabra saw what was going on threw itself back like a cat and stretched up on its hind paws which were also reinforced with claws. Geralt jumped over it cutting it mid-jump. He felt his blade cut through the body.
He ducked spun around struck again and sank to one knee. The creature screamed violently and quickly lowered its head full of teeth to the height of the witchers chest. Its large eyes glowed in the dark. Geralt pushed it back with a sharp blow of his sword pommel and made a strike at close range that separated half of its skull. Even without that half this strange creature not recorded in the witcher books snapped at him with its teeth for another dozen seconds.
Then it died with a horrible almost human sigh.
The Korr lay in a pool of blood and twitched convulsively.
The witcher stopped in front of him. I cannot believe he said that someone could be so stupid to fall for such a simple illusion as the broken sword.
He wasnt sure whether the Korr was conscious enough to understand him. But basically he didnt care.
I warned you he said as he wiped the blood trickling down his cheek. I warned you that I needed get out of here.
Mr. Schweitzer began to tremble violently. He gasped whistled and creaked. Then he was quiet and did not move again.
Water dripped from the ceiling and walls.
Are you satisfied now Regis?
Now yes.
Well then. The witcher stood up. Go on and pack your things. But be quick.
It will not take me long. Omnia mea mecum porto.
What?
I do not have much luggage.
All the better. Meet me in front of the city in half an hour.
Ill be there.
He had underestimated her. She had caught him. He only had himself to blame. Instead of hurrying he should have ridden Roach out of the back of the palace from the larger stables that were used by knights-errant servants and the staff where his company had their horses. He had rushed and by habit had used the Princess stable. And he should have guessed that she would be waiting in the royal stables.
She paced from wall to wall churning up the straw. She wore a short lynx fur a white satin blouse a black skirt and high riding boots. The horses snorted they could feel the anger radiating from her.
Oh please she said grabbing the riding whip in his hand. You are leaving! Without saying goodbye. Because a letter on a table is certainly not a goodbye. Not after whats united us. I can just imagine how your behaviour is explained and justified by unusually weighty arguments.
It will be explained and justified. Sorry Fringilla.
Sorry Fringilla. She repeated twisting her mouth furiously. How scarce how cautious nearly laconic - what sense of style. I bet the letter you left for me is edited just as elegantly. Without undue waste in terms of ink.
I must go he squeezed out. You can imagine why. And for whom. Please forgive me. I was planning to sneak away in secret quietly because… I do not want you trying to ride with us.
There you worried needlessly she said emphatically as she bent the whip into a loop. I would not ride with you even if you begged me from your knees. Oh no witcher. Ride alone die alone freeze to death in the passes alone. I have no obligation to Ciri. And to you? Do you know how many people beg for this what you have? What you now shove aside throw away with contempt?
Ill never forget you.
Oh she hissed. You have no idea how much I desire to make sure of that. If not with magic then with this whip!
You wouldnt.
Youre right I wouldnt. I couldnt. Im behaving like an abandoned and spurned lover. Classic. Ill accept it with my head held high. With pride and dignity. Ill bite back my tears. Then Ill cry into my pillow. And then I let myself be with another!
Towards the end she almost shouted.
He said nothing. She was also silent.
Geralt she finally said in a very different voice. Stay with me.
I think I love you she said when she saw that he hesitated before answering. Stay with me. I beg you. Ive never asked that of someone and do not think Ill ever do it again. I beg you.
Fringilla… he replied after a while. Youre a woman that a man could only dream of. It is my fault entirely my fault that I am not a dreamer by nature.
You she said biting her lip are like a fish hook which once stuck can only be uprooted together with blood and flesh. Well I myself am guilty I knew what I was doing when I began this dangerous game. Luckily I also know how to deal with the consequences. In this regard I have more than other women.
He said nothing.
Besides she added a broken heart while it hurts much more than a broken arm also heals much much faster.
Again he said nothing.
Fringilla looked at the bruise on his cheek. What about my amulet? Does it work well?
It is simply fabulous. Thank you.
She nodded.
Where do you ride? She asked in a completely different voice in a very different tone. What did you learn? You know where Vilgefortz is hiding dont you?
Yes. Please do not ask me to tell you. I will not.
Ill have that information. One way or the other.
Really?
I have a message she stated that is very valuable. And for you simply priceless. I will sell it to you in exchange for…
For a clear conscience he finished the sentence for her. He looked into her eyes. For the trust that I have given you. A moment ago you spoke of loving me. And now we begin to talk of exchanges?
She was silent for a long time. Then they fought fiercely for the whip they both were holding.
Yennefer. She said quickly. The one whose name youve mentioned a few times to me at night in moments of ecstasy has not ever betrayed you or Ciri. She was not an accomplice to Vilgefortz. She fearlessly undertook an unprecedented risk to save Cirilla. She suffered a defeat and fell into Vilgefortzs hands. She was surely forced by torture to perform the magical detection that took place last year. Whether she still lives is not known. Thats all I know. I swear it.
Thank you Fringilla.
Go.
I trust you he said without leaving. And I will never forget what happened between us. I trust you Fringilla. I will not stay with you but I think I loved you too… in my way. I ask that you keep secret what you are about to hear. Vilgefortzs hiding place is…
Wait she interrupted. Tell me later after you say goodbye to me. A proper goodbye. Not with a note not with stammering apologies. Say goodbye to me as I want.
She took off her lynx fur and laid it on a pile of straw. With a violent movement she tore open her blouse she wore nothing underneath. She plopped down on the fur taking Geralt with her. Geralt grabbed her neck pulled up her skirt and suddenly realized that there was no time to take off his gloves. Fortunately Fringilla was not wearing any gloves. Or underwear.
He was even more fortunate that she was not wearing spurs for immediately afterwards the heels of her riding boots were literally everywhere – there was no telling what might have happened if she had been wearing spurs.
When she cried he kissed her. Stifling her cry.
The horses sensing both of their raging passions neighed stomped and pushed against the walls swirling the dust and hay.
Castle Rhys-Rhun in Nazair on the shores of Lake Muredach! Fringilla Vigo concluded triumphantly. That is Vilgefortzs hideout. I got it out of the witcher before he rode away. We have enough time to pre-empt him. He cannot possibly be there before April.
The nine women gathered in the great pillared hall of Castle Montecalvo nodded looking at Fringilla with appreciative eyes.
Rhys-Rhun… repeated Philippa Eilhart while she bared her teeth in a predatory smile and played with the sardonyx cameo pinned to her dress. Rhys-Rhun in Nazair. See you soon Mr. Vilgefortz… See you soon!
If the witcher gets there hissed Keira Metz he will find debris that wont even smell burnt any more.
And neither will the dead bodies. Sabrina Glevissig smiled charmingly.
Bravo Miss Vigo! Sile de Tancarville gave her a nod - a gesture that Fringilla would never have expected of the famous magician. Perfect Work.
Fringilla bowed her head.
Bravo repeated Sile. About three months Toussaint… But it was well worth it.
Fringilla Vigo let her eyes wander around the sorceresses sitting at the table. Around Sile Philippa and Sabrina Glevissig. Around Keira Metz Margarita Laux-Antille and Triss Merigold. Around Francesca Findabair and Ida Emean whose intensely painted elven eyes expressed nothing. Around Assire var Anahid whose eyes were restlessness and full of anxiety.
That it was she admitted.
Perfectly sincere.
The dark blue sky was gradually turning black. A strong icy wind blew through the vineyards. Geralt buttoned up his wolfs fur clothing and wrapped a wool scarf round around his neck. He felt very well. The lovemaking had as usual brought him up to peak physical mental and spiritual condition wiping out all traces of doubt making his mind clear and lively. He regretted only that he would not experience this wonderful panacea again for a long time.
The voice of Reynart de Bois-Fresnes tore him from his thoughts.
Bad weather is coming the knight-errant said as he stared into the east from whence the wind blew. Hurry. If this wind brings snow if it manages to catch you on the passes then you are sitting in a trap. The only thing you can do then is pray to the gods - both those that you worship and those youve only heard of - for the snow to thaw.
We understand.
The Sansretour will lead you the first few days keep to the river. You will ride past a trapper trading post and come to a point where a tributary flows into the Sansretour from the right. Do not forget from the right. Its course will show you the way to Malheur Pass. If with the help of the gods you manage to conquer the Malheur do not rejoice too much you still have the Sansmerci and Mortblanc passes in front of you. You have to overcome both then you can descend into the Sudoth Valley. Sudoth has a warm micro-climate almost like Toussaint. But the soil is so poor no wine will grow there…
He broke off embarrassed as he noticed the disapproving glances.
Okay he croaked. To the point. The town of Caravista is located at the end of the Sudoth. My cousin lives there Guy de Bois-Fresnes. Visit him and refer to me. If it turns out that he has died or is an imbecile then remember that the next step of your journey is towards the plains of Mag Deira and the valley of the Sylte River. From there Geralt follow the map you had the cartographers in town draw you. While we are discussing cartography - I do not quite understand why you asked him about the castles…
Forget it Reynart. Nothing like it happened. You heard nothing and saw nothing. Even if they tighten you up on the rack. Do you understand?
I understand.
A horseman warned Cahir subduing his erupting stallion. A rider approaches from the palace at a gallop.
If there is only one Angoulême said with a big smile stroking the axe hanging from her saddle it will hardly be a problem.
The rider on the galloping horse turned out to be Dandelion. And wonder of wonders the horse turned out to be Pegasus the poets gelding who was not used to the sharp galloping and did not appear to enjoy it.
Well the troubadour said so out of breath that it looked like he had carried the gelding instead of the other way around. Well I did it. I was afraid I wouldnt be able to catch you.
Dont tell me youre coming along with us now.
No Geralt - Dandelion bowed his head - Im not coming along. Im staying here in Toussaint with Weasel. That is with Anarietta. But I had to say goodbye to you. Wish you luck on your way.
Thank the princess for everything. And find a justification for us leaving so suddenly and without saying goodbye. Explain it somehow.
You took a chivalrous vow and now you must fulfil it. Everyone in Toussaint including Little Weasel will understand that. But here… take this. This will be my contribution.
Dandelion - Geralt took a bag from the poet - we do not suffer lack of money. It isnt necessary…
This will be my contribution repeated the troubadour. Cash never hurts. Plus its not mine - I took these ducats from Little Weasels privy purse. Why are you looking at me like that? Women dont need money. And why should they? They dont drink dont roll dice - women are condemned they do it to themselves. So its all good! Now ride off before I start to cry. And when its over you have to stop by Toussaint come back to tell me everything. And I will paint Ciri. Do you promise Geralt?
I promise.
Well its all good.
Wait. Geralt turned his horse rode close to the poet and removed a secret letter from his jacket. See that this letter comes to the right place…
Fringilla Vigo?
No. Dijkstra.
Why Geralt? And how am I supposed to do that?
Find a way. I know you can do it. And now take care. Give me a hug old fool.
Give me a hug friend. Ill keep my eye out for you!
They watched him leave riding at a trot towards Beauclair.
The sky was dark.
Reynart. The witcher turned in the saddle. Ride with us.
No Geralt replied Reynart de Bois-Fresnes after a moment. I am a knight-errant. But I am not crazy.
In the great pillared hall of Castle Montecalvo they were in unusually high spirits. Here the usually dominant light of the candelabra had now been replaced by the milky light of a large magical screen. The image on the screen wavered flickered and disappeared from time to time. All this increased the tension and excitement. And nervousness.
Ha said Philippa Eilhart with a predatory smile. What a shame that I cannot be there. A little action would do me good. And a little adrenaline.
Sile de Tancarville gave her a disapproving look but said nothing. Francesca Findabair and Ida Emean stabilized the image with spells and enlarged it so that it occupied the entire screen. They could clearly see black peaks against the backdrop of deep blue sky filled with stars which also reflected on the surface of a lake situated by a dark and edgy profile of a castle.
I am still not sure Sile said whether it was proper to transfer the management of this task force to young Sabrina and Metz. Keira had her ribs broken on Thanedd she will probably want to take revenge. And Sabrina… well she likes the action and adrenaline a bit too much. Isnt that so Philippa?
We talked about this already snapped Philippa her voice was as sour as a plum. Weve laid down the rules. No one is killed if it can be avoided. Sabrina and Keiras group will enter Rhys-Rhun on tiptoe quiet as a mouse psst. They will take Vilgefortz alive without a scratch without a bruise. Those are the rules we set. Although I am still of the opinion that we should have made an example. So that the few in the castle who would have survived the night would have woken up crying and would have dreamed of this night for the rest of their lives.
Revenge the sorceress from Kovir said dryly is the joy of mediocre weak and petty minds.
Maybe agreed Philippa with a seemingly indifferent smile. But it is still a joy.
Enough of that Margarita Laux-Antille lifted a glass of sparkling wine in the air. I suggest we drink to the health of Miss Fringilla Vigo through whose efforts Vilgefortzs hideout was discovered. Really Miss Fringilla good work very good work.
Fringilla bowed and raised her glass in reply. She noticed a hint of mockery in Philippas black eyes. There was indignation in Triss Merigolds blue-eyed gaze. She could not decipher the smiles of Francesca or Sile.
It begins said Assire var Anahid pointing to the magical image.
They sat down comfortably. In order to see better Philippa dampened the candlelight with a spell.
They watched as black figures flew by the mountains as silent and agile as bats. As they broke formation and descended to the battlements and ramparts of Castle Rhys-Rhun.
It must be a hundred years ago murmured Philippa since Ive had a broom between my legs. Soon I will forget how to fly.
Sile eyes fixed on the screen silenced her with an impatient hiss.
The windows of the black castle flashed briefly with fire. Once twice three times. They knew what it was. Locked doors and locking chains being shattered under the blows of ball lightning.
Theyre inside Assire var Anahid said quietly the only one not looking at the screen but instead into a crystal ball lying on the table. The task force is inside. But something is wrong. Something is not as it should be.
Fringillas heart was pounding and her stomach felt queasy. She knew that everything was not the way it should be.
Miss Glevissig reported Assire again will open a direct communicator.
The space between the pillars of the hall suddenly flared up and an oval materialized into Sabrina Glevissig - dressed in mens clothes her hair held back by a chiffon scarf around her forehead her face blackened with strips of camouflage. Behind the sorceress back they could see dirty stone walls and shredded rags that had once been tapestries.
Sabrinas hand stretched out towards them her glove displaying the hanging remains of long strips of cobwebs.
Just these! She said gesturing violently There are plenty of these here! Just these! Hell what a stupid… What a disgrace…
Coherent Sabrina!
What coherent? Shouted the magician from Kaedwen. How should I make it more coherent? Can you not see? This is the castle of Rhys-Rhun! It is empty! Dilapidated and empty! It is a damned empty ruin! Theres nothing here! Nothing!
Keira Metz appeared standing behind Sabrinas back looking like the purest hell with camouflage painted on her face.
No one she confirmed quietly has been in this castle. For about fifty years. For fifty years there has not been a living soul except for spiders rats and bats. We have raided the entirely wrong place.
Have you verified that this is not an illusion?
Do you think we are children Philippa?
Be careful both of you. Philippa Eilhart nervously ran her fingers through her hair. Tell the mercenaries and novices that this was an exercise. They should return to be paid. Return immediately. And put a good face on it you hear? A very good face!
The communication oval went out. Only one image remained on the screen. The castle of Rhys-Rhun against the black glittering stars of the heavens. And the lake where the stars were reflected.
Fringilla Vigo looked at the table. She felt as though the pulsating blood in her cheeks would come bursting out at any moment.
I really… she said as she could no longer endure the silence that prevailed in the great pillared hall of Castle Montecalvo. I really… do not…
I do said Triss Merigold.
This castle… Philippa said thoughtfully ignoring the others. This castle… Rhys-Rhun… We will have to destroy it. Completely lay it to ruins. And any records of this whole affair – legends or traditions will be required to submit to a careful censorship. Do you ladies know what I mean?
Very well. Findabair Francesca who had been silent until then nodded. Ida Emean who had also been silent allowed a very eloquent snort.
I… Fringilla Vigo was still stunned. I really do not understand how… how this could happen…
Ah Sile de Tancarville said after a very long silence. There is nothing further to say Miss Vigo. No one is perfect.
Philippa snorted softly. Assire var Anahid sighed and looked up at the ceiling.
Ultimately Sile added with pursed lips it is something that each of us has already experienced at some point. Each of us as we sit here has at some time been betrayed exploited or made a mockery of by a man.
I love thee thy beauty I covet and choose;
Be willing my darling or force I shall use
Dear father oh father he seizes my arm!
The Alder King father has done me harm!
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Everything has already been done once everything will eventually happen again. And everything has already been described before.
Vysogota of Corvo
CHAPTER FIVE
A hot and stuffy afternoon fell on the forest the lakes surface until recently was dark as polished jade now gleamed like gold. The reflection off of the surface from the sun was so blinding that Ciri had to shade her watery eyes with her hand.
She ran through the bushes that grew on the shore and forced Kelpie into the lake the deep water reached above the knees of the mare. The water was so clear that even from the height of her saddle Ciri could see the shadow of the horse on the colourful mosaic floor the seaweed and the shells. She saw a small crab moving very quickly among the pebbles.
Kelpie whinnied. Ciri jerked the reins and moved into the shallows but not all the way to the shore because it was sandy with many stones which would hinder fast travel. She directed the mare closer to the edge of the water where she could run on reasonably firm gravel. She let the mare trot but after a while the trot became slower. With a cry she kicked her heels into Kelpies side and spurred her into a gallop. Water sprayed up on all sides flashing in the sun like molten silver.
She did not slow down even when she saw the tower in front of her. They literally flew through the shallow water. An ordinary horse would have certainly slowed down. But Kelpies breathing was deep and regular and her canter was still fast and lightweight. They ran into the courtyard in full momentum making a great noise as the horseshoes struck the cobblestones she slowed the mare sharply so that for a moment the shoes slipped on the cobbles. She stopped right in front of the elves that waited at the foot of the tower. Before their very noses. She felt satisfaction when two of the usually steady and dispassionate elves recoiled involuntarily.
Dont be alarmed she snorted. I wont hit you! Unless I wanted to.
The elves quickly recovered smoothing their faces to calm again their indifferent eyes started back at her with nonchalance. Ciri jumped or rather flew from the saddle. In her eyes was a challenge.
Bravo said the blond elf with a triangular face emerging from the shadows of an arcade. A nice performance Lochlaith.
He had greeted her the same as when she entered the Tower of the Swallow and found herself in the middle of blooming spring. But that was a long time ago and it no longer produced any impression on Ciri.
I am not the Lady of the Lake she protested. I am a prisoner here! And you are my jailors! Why not admit it?
Please! She threw the reins to one of the elves. The horse needs to be rubbed down. And given a cool water to drink. And take good care of her!
The blond elf smiled.
Indeed he said looking at the elf leading Kelpie to the stable. Youre an imprisoned here and mistreated by cruel jailors. It is visible at a glance.
They get what they deserve! She put her hands on her hips and glared into his clear aquamarine eyes. I treat them like they treat me. A prison is a prison.
You astonish me Lochlaith.
And you treat me like a stupid kid. And you have not even introduced yourself.
Sorry. My name is Crevan Espane aep Caomhan Macha. And I am an Aen Saevherne if you know what that means.
Yes I do she had no time to hide her admiration. A Knowing one. Elven wizards.
You could call it that. For convenience I use an alias Avallach so you can call me that.
And who told you Ciri frowned that I have any intention of talking to you? A Knowing one or not you are my jailor and I am…
A prisoner he finished sarcastically. You already said that. Also that you are a prisoner that is ill-treated. The riding trips are undoubtedly forced you wear a sword on your back under pressure and as punishment you have to wear those garments which are so much more tasteful newer and cleaner than the one in which you were discovered. However despite the harsh conditions you do not give up. The wrong that we have committed again you you repay with rebellion. You also broke with great courage some mirrors that were true works of art.
She flushed with anger and shame.
Oh he added hastily. You can break what you want. They are only things – even if they were made by artist several hundred years ago. Will you walk with me to the lake?
The wind had risen and it somewhat eased her embarrassment. Additionally the tall trees around the tower provided shade.
The water in the lake was a murky green colour the abundant water lilies that adorned its surface with their yellow flowers made it seem like a meadow. The sandpipers squawking and shaking their red beaks move quickly away at their approach.
That mirror… Ciri stammered her heels digging into the wet gravel. Im sorry about that. I was in a rage. That was all.
Oh.
They were ignoring me. The elves. When I speak to them they pretend they dont understand. And they speak to me on purpose so that I do not understand them. Just to humiliate me.
You speak our language perfectly. However he explained calmly its still a foreign language to you. Besides you are using hen llinge and they use ellylon. The differences are not great but they are there.
You understand. Every word.
Im speaking to you using hen llinge. It is the language the elves speak on your world.
And you? She turned away. From what world are you? Im not an ignorant child. At night I look up at the sky. There is not a single constellation that I know. This world is not my own. Its not my place. I came here by accident… I want to get out. To leave.
She bent down and picked up a stone and made a motion as if to throw it at the sandpipers on the edge of the lake. She stopped when she noticed his stare.
When I go riding she said indignantly I always end up back at the lake and the tower. Whether I head out on either side whether I change direction no matter what I do every time I end up at the lake and the tower. Every time. I cannot get away from this place. So it is a prison. Its worse than a dungeon with bars on the windows. Do you know why? Because it is humiliating. Ellylon or not it angers me when they make fun of me and show their disdain. Dont pretend that youre not laughing at me and despising me. Are you surprised when I get angry?
I am surprised in fact his eyes widened. Extremely.
She sighed and shrugged.
I went into the tower over a week ago she said making an effort to stay calm. And when I came out I was in a different world. You were waiting for me sitting and playing a flute. You said that you were surprised that I had taken so long in coming. You addressed me by my name but later you gave me that nonsense about the Lady of the Lake. After that you disappeared without an explanation. Leaving me in this prison. Call this what you please. I call it contempt and malicious wounding.
It has only been eight days Zireael.
Ah she frowned So Ive been lucky? Because it could be eight weeks? Or eight months? Or eight…
She paused.
Much you have strayed away he said quietly from Lara Dorren. You have lost your inheritance the bond with her blood. It is not surprising that people do not understand you or you them. You dont just talk differently but think differently too – in completely different ways. What is eight days or eight weeks? Time is not important.
I confess she shouted back angrily. Im not a wise elf Im just a silly mortal. For me time is important so I count the days and even hours. And I figure it has been a lot of some and more of others. I do not want anything from you I do not want you to explain why it is spring in these woods or why unicorns live here and I do not care why the constellations in the sky are not known to me. I do not care how you knew my name or how I came here. I just want one thing – to go home! To my world! To my people! To those who think just like me! In the same way!
You can go back to them. After a period of time.
I want it now! She cried. Not after a period of time dammit! Since time here takes forever! Why can I not leave now? I came here alone by choice! So what right do you have holding me here?
You did come alone he said seriously. But not by choice. Fate has brought you here and we helped a little. Long have we been awaiting you. Even by the standards of our time.
I do not understand any of this.
We have been waiting a long time he said not paying any attention to her objection fearful of one thing – that you would not be able to get here. But you did it. You have confirmed your origin your blood. And that means that here and not among the Dhoine is your place. You are the rightful daughter of Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal.
I am the daughter of Pavetta! I do not even know who this Lara of your is!
He paused. Almost imperceptibly.
In that case he reconsidered It would be best if I explain who Lara is. But time is short so I would prefer to use the most popular explanations along the way. But from you recklessness and defiance you have harassed your mare…
Harassed my mare? Ha! You do not know what my mare can handle. Where are we going?
If youll excuse me Ill also tell you that along the way.
Ciri slowed Kelpie from her mad gallop.
Avallach had not lied. There in the open in the grasslands and heaths from which protruded menhirs worked the same force that surround Tor Zireael. No matter which direction she rode or how fast and invisible magic force pulled her back in a circle.
Kelpie snorted and Ciri patted her neck looking calm at the bunch of elves. A moment ago when Avallach finally told her what they wanted from her she took off at a full gallop to get away from them leaving them as far behind as possible. To escape them and their arrogant and unusual request.
But there they were back in front of her. She had rode a mile more or less. But Avallach had not lied. There was no escape.
The only good thing about the gallop was that it had cooled her head and soothed her nerves. She was calmer. But she was still shaking with anger.
Ive fallen in deep she thought. By the gods why did I enter that tower?
She shivered as she remembered Bonhart speeding up behind her on a lathered horse on the cracking ice. She controlled herself. Im alive she thought. So its not the end of the fight. The fight only end with death everything else is just an interruption. So they taught me at Kaer Morhen.
She walked Kelpie slowly but when she saw the mare proudly raise her head she encouraged her to a trot. She rode around the menhirs. The grass and heather reached to her stirrups.
Soon she caught up to Avallach and the three elves. The Knowing one was smiling mysteriously and watched her with his aquamarine eyes.
Please Avallach she said hoarsely. Say it was a joke.
A shadow crossed his face.
Im not in the habit of making jokes like this he said seriously. I will seriously reiterate that we want you to bear a son Swallow daughter of Lara Dorren. Once you give birth to the child well let you leave here and go back to your own world. Of course the choice is yours. I imagine your wild ride will have helped you to make the decision. What is your answer?
My answer is no Ciri replied flatly. Categorically permanently no. Im not ready and that is that.
I confess he shrugged you disappointed me. But its your decision.
How can you even ask such a thing? She said her voice trembling. How can you? By what right?
He looked at her blankly. Ciri also noticed that the other elves were watching.
It seemed to me he said that I already clarified the secret of your origin. It seemed to me that you understood me. Therefore your question surprises me. We have the right and we can demand Swallow. Your father Cregennan took our child. You have to give one to us. To pay off the debt. It seems to me to be only logical and fair.
My father… I do not remember my father but he was called Duny. Not Cregennan. I told you that already!
And I told you that a few ludicrously short human generations mean nothing to us.
But I wont do it! Shouted Ciri startling the horses. Do you not understand? I wont! I hate the idea that you would try to implant a fucking parasite in me it makes me sick to think that this parasite would grow in me that…
She stopped suddenly seeing the faces of the elves. In two of them was reflected infinite amazement. In the third an infinite hatred. Avallach intentionally coughed.
Lets go he said coldly a little ahead and talk face to face. Your views Swallow are a bit too radical to proclaim in public.
She obeyed. They rode ahead for a time without speaking.
Ill escape Ciri broke the silence. You will not be able to hold me against my will. I escaped from the island of Thanedd I ran away from my captors and the Nilfgaardians I escaped Bonhart and the Owl. I will also escape your hands. I will find a way with sorcery.
I thought he said that you rely more on your friends. On Yennefer. On Geralt.
You know about them? She said. Well yes. You are a Knowing one! Therefore you know about them because I was thinking about them. In my world they are both in danger right now in this moment. And you want to keep me here… For at least nine months. You see I have no choice. I understand that it is important for you to have a child of the Elder blood but I cant. I just cant.
The elf rode so close that their knees touched.
As I said the decision is yours. We respect that but we must take certain steps. You yourself will find that there is no escape Swallow. If you refuse to cooperate then you will stay here forever and you will never see your world or friends again.
This is blackmail!
Conversely he ignored her protest. If you will obey our request we can tell you that time for us really does mean nothing.
I do not understand.
Here time passes differently than there. If you help us we will reward you. Giving you back the time you will lose while among us. Among the People of the Alders.
She was silent staring at Kelpies black mane. I have to think of a delaying tactic she thought frantically. What did Vesemir use to say – When you are to hang ask for a cup of water. You never know what is going to happen before they bring it.
One of the elves whistled shrilly.
The horse ridden by Avallach whinnied and nervously stamped the ground. The elf mastered it and shouted something back in elvish. Ciri saw one of the riders pull a bow from his saddle. She stood up in the stirrups and shadowed her eyes with her hands.
Stay calm. Avallach said sharply. Ciri sighed.
About two hundred feet away rushing through the heath was a herd of unicorns. At least thirty of them. She had seen them before sometimes at dawn they would come down to the lake under the Tower of the Swallow to drink. But they never let her approach them – they always disappeared like ghosts.
The leader of the herd was a strong stallion a rust-red colour. He stopped and whinnied loudly rearing. He stood on his hind legs with his front legs pawing at the air in a way no horse would be able to do.
Ciri noticed with astonishment that Avallach and his elves had started to softly chant some strange monotonous melody.
Who are you?
She shook her head.
Who are you? The question resonated inside her head pounding at her temples. Suddenly the song of the elves escalated. The unicorn whinnied and the whole herd replied. The earth shook as the animals ran off.
The elves song stopped. Ciri saw Avallach wiping sweat from his forehead. The elf looked at her out of the corner of his eye to see if she saw it.
Not everything here is as nice as it seems on first sight. He said dryly. Not everything.
Are you afraid of unicorns? Theyre wise and friendly.
He did not answer.
Ive heard she did not give up. That elves and unicorns love one another.
He turned his head.
Consider then he said coolly what you saw then was an argument between lovers.
She asked no more questions.
She had enough of her own concerns.
The tops of the hills were crowned with menhirs and dolmens. The sight of them reminded Ciri of the stone in Ellander where Yennefer had taught her magic. Oh that was a long time ago she thought. Centuries ago…
One of the elves screamed. Ciri looked in the direction that the woman was pointing.
Before she could properly realise that the herd had returned led by the red stallion another elf cried out. Ciri sat up in her saddle.
From behind the hill on the opposite side emerged a second herd. The unicorn guiding them was a bluish grey colour.
Avallach shouted a few words. They were in the Elvish dialect ellylon that she found incomprehensible but the command seem to be for them to grab their bows. Avallach turned towards Ciri and she felt her mind begin to hum. It was a sound quite similar to that of when you put your ear to a sea conch. But much stronger.
Do not resist - she heard a voice – Do not defend yourself. I have to make a leap. I have to transfer us elsewhere. There is mortal danger here.
Suddenly they heard a whistle and a shout. The rumble of shod hooves. From over the top of the hill galloped riders. A whole detachment.
The hill was covered with horses and the riders wore helmets with crests. From their shoulders billowed cloaks whose vibrant red cinnamon and amaranth colours were reminiscent of the reflection of fire in the evening sky.
With whistles and shouts the riders headed towards them.
Before they had made it half way the unicorns had disappeared.
The leader of the horsemen was a black-haired elf sitting on a dark brown stallion who looked like a dragon – he was huge and had trappings embroidered with golden scales and wearing a horned bukranion. All the other elves had black hair and red jackets under their armour which was made of incredibly small steel rings that clung to the body like wool knitwear.
Avallach he saluted.
Eredin.
You owe me for the help. To be paid off when requested.
I will pay when you ask.
The black-haired elf jumped to the ground. Avallach also dismounted and motioned for Ciri and the others to do the same. They climbed the hill between the upright stones surrounded by bushes and blooming myrtle. Ciri eyed her companions. Both were of the same stature – very tall. But Avallachs face was modest while the riders commanders face resembled a bird of prey. Blond and black she thought. Good and evil. Light and Dark.
Zireael let me introduce to you this man – Eredin Breacc Glas.
Nice to meet you. The elf bowed. Ciri replied with a clumsy bow.
How did you know asked Avallach that something threatened us?
I didnt know the elf looked at Ciri intently. I patrol the plains because news has spread that the unicorns have grown restless and aggressive. No one knows why. Now I know the reason. Its because of her.
Avallach did not confirm or deny. Ciris haughty eyes meet the black-haired elfs. For a moment they both looked at each other and no one wanted to be the first to look away.
She has to be of the Elder Blood? The elf shook his head. Aen Hen Ichaer. Lara Dorren aep Shiadhals legacy? This is hard to believe. She looks like an ordinary small Dhoine human female.
Avallach remained silent. His face was impassive and indifferent.
I assume Eredin continued that you have made a mistake. Bah! Rumour has it that you never make mistakes. In this creation deeply hidden lies Laras gene. When you look closely you can see some of the characteristics. Indeed in her eyes I find something that awakens in me the memory of Lara Dorren. Am I right Avallach? Who else if not you should know?
Again Avallach remained silent. But Ciri noticed a shadow of a blush on his pale face.
She was very surprised and that gave her pause.
Generally speaking sneered the dark-haired elf I can see something in the little Dhoine. I can see it and appreciate it. Like Ive found a nugget of gold on a pile of manure.
Ciris eyes flashed angrily. Avallach slowly raised his head.
You talk he said slowly just like a human Eredin.
Eredin Breacc Glas smiled showing his teeth. Ciri had seen such teeth – very white very small inhuman all identical and with no canines. She had seen teeth like that in the elves lying dead lined up in the courtyard of the guardhouse in Kaedwen. She had also seen such teeth in Sparks. But when Sparks smiled it looked nice when Eredin did it it looked ghastly.
I wonder if this girl who is trying to pierce my eyes knows the reason why she is here? He asked.
Yes.
And is she ready to cooperate?
Not quite.
Not quite he repeated. This is bad. The nature of the task requires cooperation for it to completely work. Unconditional. Otherwise it will not work. And because Tir Na Lia is barely half a days journey away it is worth it to know where we stand.
Youre too impatient Avallach curled his lips. What can we gain in such a hurry?
Eternity Eredin said soberly but his strange green eyes flashed. But this is your speciality Avallach. Your speciality and your responsibility.
So youve said.
Yes so Ive said. And now if youll excuse me duty calls. Ill leave some of my men to escort you to safety. Id advise spending the night here on this hill if you leave at dawn you will be in Tir Na Lia at the right time. Va Faill. Oh one more thing… he leaned down and plucked a blossoming twig of myrtle. He sniffed it and the handed it to Ciri with a bow. Reconciliation he said shortly. An apology for careless words. Va Faill luned.
He quickly left and soon the ground shook as the majority of his band left.
Dont tell me Ciri snarled that I would have to have… to have with him… If it is then never ever…
No Avallach said unhurried. It will not be him. Calm down.
Ciri moved the myrtle closer to her face so that Avallach would not notice the excitement and fascination that enveloped her.
I am calm.
The dry heather was replaced with lush grass green ferns and yellow buttercups. Soon they saw a lazily flowing river lined with poplars. The water in the river although clean had a brownish colour. It smelled of peat.
Avallach played on his flute a variety of lively tunes. Ciri rode frowning and thinking hard.
Who she asked is to be the father of the child for whom you care so much? Or maybe it does not matter?
It is important. Am I to understand that you have made a decision?
No you do not understand. Just explain some things.
Im at your service. What do you want to know?
You know what.
For a time they rode in silence. Ciri saw some swans floating down the river.
The father. Avallach said calmly and factually will be Auberon Muircetach. Auberon Muircetach is our… How do you say… Supreme leader?
King? King of the Aen Seidhe?
The Aen Seidhe the People of the Hills are the elves of your world. We are the Aen Elle the People of the Alders. And Auberon Muircetach is of course our king.
King of the Alders?
You can call him that.
They rode in silence. It was very warm.
Avallach.
Go ahead.
If I decide then… later… Ill be free?
You will be free and you can go where you want. If you decide you can stay. With the child.
She snorted dismissively but said nothing.
So you have decided? He asked.
Ill decide when we get there.
We are on the spot.
Through the branches of the weeping willows that hung down over the river flowing like green curtains Ciri saw a palace. She had never seen anything like it. As if it were not made of marble and alabaster but of white lace – so delicate and light that it seemed ethereal as if they were not buildings but the ghosts of buildings. Ciri expected that at any moment the wind would blow and the palaces would disappear along with the rising river mist. But when the wind blew the mist disappeared and moved the willow branches and wrinkled the river but the palaces remained. Just more beautiful.
Ciri looked raptly at the wispy hanging terraces and balconies the bridges over the river which were hung with festoons of ivy the stairs balustrades the arcades and cloisters the columns the domes and the slender asparagus-like towers.
Tir Na Lia Avallach said quietly.
The closer they move the more fascinating the charm of the place became. Ciris heart pounded and her throat was tight as she passed fountains mosaics and sculptures. Even the openwork structures whose use she did not understand. And so she was sure that they did not serve anything they were just an addition to the aesthetics and harmony.
Tir Na Lia Avallach repeated. Have you ever seen anything like it?
Yes she said through her tight throat. I saw the remains of such a thing. In Shaerrawedd.
This time the elf was silent for a long while.
They crossed the river by a bridge the arch looked so frail that Kelpie rebelled and snorted when she tried to cross.
Ciri was tense and restless but carefully looked around not wanting to miss anything none of the views that the city of Tir Na Lia had to offer. Firstly from a burning curiosity. Secondly she had not stopped thinking about the possibility of escape and diligently kept watch for such an occasion.
On bridges and terraces in malls and colonnades balconies and porches she saw elves moving with long hair wearing tight jerkins and short layers with fancy embroidery. Or in sheer flowing dresses or in tight clothes that emphasised the curves of their bodies.
Before the porch of one of the palaces they were met by Eredin Breacc Glas. On his instruction small grey-clad elves ran quickly and quietly to handle their horses. Ciri watched him in some surprise. Avallach Eredin and all the elves that she had met so far were extremely tall so that to look them in the eye she had to bend back her head. These grey elves were smaller than her. Some other race she thought a race of servants. Even in this fairy-tale word someone has to work for the lazy.
They entered the palace. Ciri sighed. She was a princess of royal blood and had been raised in a palace. But such marble stucco mosaics stained glass mirrors and chandeliers she had never seen. She felt in all that dazzling splendour wrong awkward out of place… dusty sweaty and tired from the trip.
Avallach by contrast did not care at all. He dusted his pants with his gloves ignoring the fact that dust was settling on the mirrors. Then with a stately gesture he gave the gloves to a young elf who bowed before him.
Auberon he said briefly is expecting us?
Eredin smiled.
Yes you are expected. He is anxious. He has demanded that the Swallow come to him immediately without a moments delay. I have dissuaded him.
Avallach frowned.
Zireael Eredin explained should appear before the king unhurried without pressure relaxed calm and in good spirits. To ensure a good mood a bath new clothes a new hairstyle and makeup. Auberon can probably endure that long.
Ciri sighed deeply and looked carefully at the dark-haired elf. She was surprised at his sudden sympathy. Eredin flashed her a smile with his straight white teeth without canines.
The only thing that concerns me he said our Swallows eyes – twinkling like a hawk have not stopped glancing left and right like a ferret looking for a hole in her cage. From what I can see Swallow is far from an unconditional surrender.
Avallach did not say anything. Ciri of course said nothing as well.
Im not surprised Eredin continued. She could not be otherwise since she is the blood of Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal. Listen to me very carefully Zireael. There is no escape. You cannot break a Geas Garadh a barrier of Magic.
The look Ciri threw his way clearly said that would have to be proven to be believed.
Even if by some miracle you collapse the barrier Eredin was not distracted by her look you know that it would mean your doom. This world seems very beautiful. But it can also bring death especially to strangers. A wound from the horn of a unicorn has no cure not even magic. Know too that you will get no help from your innate talents. Do not make any attempt to try and jump. If you did know that my Dearg Ruadhri – my Red Horsemen are able to cross the chasms of time and space.
She did not really understand what he was saying. But it puzzled her that Avallach suddenly scowled and frowned clearly unhappy with Eredins speech. As if Eredin had said too much.
Lets go he said. With your permission Zireael. I am going to leave you in the hands of the women. Youll have to prepare quickly. First impressions are everything.
Her heart pounded in her chest her temples throbbed with blood and her hands trembled.
She mastered it by clenching her hands into fists. And calmed herself by breathing deeply.
She relaxed her shoulders and tried to move her stiff neck.
Once more she glanced into the big mirror. The sight was quite satisfactory. Her eyes and lips had been painted after her bath her damp hair had been trimmed and combed so that it at least partially obscured the scar on her face. She wore a silver skirt open to mid-thigh a red vest and a silk blouse. The neck scarf she had been given touched it off nicely.
She adjusted the scarf and then reached under her skirt to check with amazement the underwear she wore. Briefs as thin as gossamer and stockings which inexplicably stayed on her thighs without suspenders.
She reached for the door handle. She hesitated as if it was not a door handle but a sleeping cobra.
The plague she automatically thought in Elvish Ive dealt with armed men. I can deal with…
She closed her eyes and sighed. And entered the room.
No one was inside. On the table lay a book and an old malachite carafe. On the walls were strange bas reliefs draped curtains and floral tapestries. In one corner stood a statue. And in the other corner a bed with a canopy. Her heart started pounding again. She swallowed.
From the corner of her eye she saw movement. Not in the chamber. Out on the terrace.
He sat there his back to her in a half profile.
Although she had learned that among the elves nobody looked like how she used to believe Ciri was shocked. Every time they had spoken of a king she had imagined someone like Ervyll of Verden to whom she had been very close to becoming his daughter on one occasion. When thinking of the king she remembered him smelling of onions and beer a smelly fat man with swollen eyes and a red nose stuck out from over his beard and wielding a sceptre in his hand covered in brown spots and bitten nails.
On the terrace sat quite a different king.
He was very thin and apparently very tall. He wore a black Jacket and traditional high elven boots with buckles across the length of the leg. His long grey hair fell down over sloping shoulders and down his back. His hands were white and narrow with long fingers.
He was busy blowing bubbles. He held a bowl with soap and water and a straw into which he blew again and again as iridescent rainbow bubbles floated down to the river.
Ciri coughed softly.
The King of the Alders turned. Ciri could not help but sigh. His eyes were extraordinary.
Clear as molten lead and huge. And full of indescribable sadness.
Zireael he said. Thank you for agreeing to see me.
Ciri stood silently not knowing what to say. Auberon Muircetach blew into the straw again and launched another bubble into the air.
To control her trembling hands she clasped them together and cracked her fingers then nervously smoothed her hair. The elf didnt notice as all his attention was focused on the bubbles.
Are you nervous?
No she blatantly lied. Im not.
Are you in a hurry?
Of course.
She probably put too much defiance in her voice she felt that she was teetering on the edge of civility. The elf gave no sign that he noticed instead he inflated a huge bubble at the end of his straw. He admired his work for a long time.
Would I be unduly curious if I asked where you are in such a hurry to go?
Home she said but then added in a gentler tone. To my world.
To where?
To my world!
Ah. Sorry. I could have sworn you said – My mule. It made me flustered. You speak our language perfectly but you should pay more attention to intonation and pronunciation.
Is it important to intonate? It would not if you had not brought me here to talk.
Nothing hurts when aspiring to perfection.
From the end of the straw emerged a new bubble which detached and began to float through the air before exploding on impact with a willow branch. Ciri sighed again.
So you are in a hurry to return to your world said King Auberon Muircetach. Your world! You people really do not suffer from excessive modesty. Your hairy ancestors appeared with sword in hand latter than the chickens. And yet I have never heard a hen claim that it was their world. Why are you fidgeting like a monkey? What Im saying should interest you. After all it is your history. Oh let me guess – you do not care about this story and youre bored.
The breeze carried another bubble away down the river. Ciri remained silent biting her lip.
Your hairy ancestors the elf continued shaking the straw in the bowl quickly learned to use their opposable thumb and rudimentary intelligence. With their help they did different things usually as ridiculous as terrible. What I mean to say is that if anything that your ancestors created was not terrible then it was ridiculous.
Another bubble followed the first then another.
We Aen Elle we cared very little about the deeds of your ancestors we unlike the Aen Seidhe our cousins we left that world a long time ago. We chose another universe more interesting. In that time it will surprise you it was possible to move freely from one world to another quite easily. With some talent and practice that is. I have no doubt that you understand what I mean.
Ciri was intrigued but remained silent aware that the elf was teasing. She did not want to facilitate the task.
Auberon Muircetach smiled. He turned around. On his neck was a golden torc – a symbol of the ruler known in the elder speech as a torch.
Mire luned.
Again he blew lightly into the straw while gently swaying. A fan of smaller bubbles soared into the air.
The worlds were like these bubbles he hummed. So it was so it was… We told ourselves whats the difference we will stay here a little while then there a little while so what if the stupid Dhoine insist on destroying themselves and the world? Well go somewhere else to another bubble…
Under his burning gaze Ciri nodded and licked her lips. The elf smiled again and blew his bubbles again this time so that the straw formed a large cluster of smaller bubbles and joined to each other.
Then came the Conjunction the elf raised his straw laden with bubbles. The number of worlds increased. But the door closed. It was closed to all but a handful of elected people. And the clock was ticking. We needed to open the door. Urgently. It was imperative. Do you understand that word?
Im not stupid.
No youre not he turned his head again. You cannot be. You are Aen Hen Ichaer the Elder Blood. Come.
He extended his hand and Ciri inadvertently clenched her teeth. But Auberon only touched her forearm and then her hands. She felt a pleasant tingling. She dared to look into his incredible eyes.
When I was told I did not believe it he whispered. But it is true. Your eyes are Shiadhal. Laras eyes.
Ciri looked down. She felt stupid and insecure. The King of the Alders rested his elbows on the railing and his chin in his hands.
For a long time it seemed like her was only interesting in the swans swimming in the river.
Thanks for coming he said finally without turning his head. Now go away and leave me alone.
She found Avallach on a terrace by the river just about to board a boat in the company of a beautiful elf with hair the colour of straw. The elfs lips were painted a pistachio colour and her eyelids and temples were painted with gold.
Ciri was about to turn around and leave when a gesture from Avallach restrained her. With another gesture he invited her onto the boat. She hesitated. She did not want to talk in front of witnesses. Avallach said a few quiet words to the elf and kissed her hand. The elf shrugged and walked away. Only once did she glance at Ciri and her eyes show exactly what she thought of her.
If you can refrain from comment said Avallach as she sat on a bench in the bow. He sat down across from her pulled out his flute and began to play ignoring the boat completely… Ciri watched anxiously but the boat slid perfectly into the middle of the river without deviating an inch. The boat was very strange Ciri had never seen anything like it even in Skellige where one could see everything that could move through water. It had a high bow carved into the shape of a key was very narrow and very shaky. Indeed only an elf could sit in something like this and play carefree on a flute instead of rowing and steering.
Avallach stopped playing.
What is it that troubles you?
He listened to Ciris story with a vague smile.
Youre disappointed he did not ask. Disappointed and disillusioned and above all outraged.
Not at all! Im not!
You should not be the elf became serious. Auberon treated you with reverence as a native Aen Elle. Do not forget we the People of the Alders do not ever hurry. We have time.
He told me something else.
I know what he said.
What he wanted well you know?
Certainly.
She had learned a lot. She did not sigh nor gave a hint of impatience or irritability when he put the flute to his lips and started playing again. Melodic and wistful. The boat sailed and bridges passed overhead.
We have very serious reasons for believing he said after the fourth bridge had passed that your world is in danger of disappearing. In a natural disaster on a massive scale. You do have some elementary education so you must have heard of the Aen Ithlinnespeath – the Ithlinnes Prophecy. She speaks of the time of the White winter. In our opinion it will be a powerful ice age. It will be so extensive that it threatens the existence of most living creatures. They will simply die from the cold. Those who survive will fall into barbarism killing each other in ruthless battles for food they will become prey to predators mad with hunger. Remember the text from the prophecy – The time of contempt the Axe and the Wolfs Blizzard.
Ciri did not interrupt him afraid that he would start playing the flute again.
The child on which so much depends said Avallach as he played with his flute will be a descendant of Lara Dorren and a carrier of the gene a gene that was specially built by us it may save the inhabitants of your world. We have reason to think that the descendant of Lara and your child of course will have abilities a thousand times more powerful than those we have the Knowing ones. The same as you yourself possess. Do you know what I mean?
Ciri had learned that in the Elder Speech such rhetorical figures although seemingly questions do not require an answer but simply prohibit a response.
In short continued Avallach we will have the opportunity to travel between the worlds and not for only a single person. We want to open Ard Gaeth – The Great Gate which all will pass through. We could do this before the Conjunction and we will achieve it now. We will evacuate the dying world and the Aen Seidhe who live there our brothers whom we are obliged to help. We do not neglect such a responsibility. We will take all of the worlds endangered Zireael. Everyone even the humans.
Really? Ciri couldnt contain herself. Even the Dhoine?
Yes. Trust me. Do you now see how important you are how we care about you? It is imperative that you be patient. It is important that you return to Auberon and spend the night with him. Believe me his behaviour has not been a sign of reluctance. He knows that for you this is not easy and does not wish to be inappropriately hasty. He knows many things Swallow. You may have no doubt noticed.
Yes Ive noticed she snorted. Ive also noticed that the current has born us quite far from Tir Na Lia. Time to take the oars. Which moreover I do not see here.
Because they are not here Avallach raised his arm turned his hand and snapped his fingers. The boat stopped. It stood in place then began to move against the current.
The elf sat comfortably put his flute to his lips and completely devoted himself to music.
That night the King of the Alders invited her to dinner. When she entered accompanied by the rustle of silk he motioned her to sit down at the table. There were no servants. He served himself.
Dinner consisted of more than a dozen varieties of vegetables there were also mushrooms fried stewed and dipped in sauce. Ciri had never tried that kind of mushroom.
Some were white and thin like leaves with a delicate and delicious flavour others were brown and black aromatic and fleshy.
The meal was washed down with rose wine which was light and relaxed the tongue.
Before she knew it she had told him things that she never thought shed tell anyone. He listened patiently. And then she suddenly remembered what it was she had come here to do.
She frowned and stopped.
As I understand it Auberon said offering her another kind of mushroom greenish and smelling like apple pie you are convinced that destiny binds you to this man Geralt?
Thats right she said picking up a glass with lipstick marks around the edges. Destiny. He that is Geralt is predestined for me and I him. Our fates are intertwined. Therefore it would be better if I left immediately. Do you understand?
I admit not much.
Destiny she drank a little wine. The power that is not advisable to resist. So I think… No no thank you I do not want more I am stuffed to bursting.
What do you mean?
I think it is wrong for you to keep me here. And if you force me… Well you know what I mean. I have to leave here and hurry to their aid… Because my destiny…
Fate he interrupted raising his cup. Predestination. Something that is inevitable. The mechanism that causes a virtually infinite number of unforeseeable events to necessarily lead to one result and not another. Is that it?
Exactly!
So where and why do you want to go? Drink wine enjoy the moment enjoy life. What is to come will come if it is inevitable.
Its not that simple.
Thus contradicting yourself.
Thats not true.
You deny the denial thats a vicious circle.
No she said shaking her head. You cant sit there and do nothing. Nothing comes by itself!
Thats a sophism.
You cannot mindlessly waste time! Youll miss the right moment… There is often only one unrepeatable. Time cannot go backwards.
Excuse me he said getting up from the table. Look at this.
He pointed to a wall which was decorated with an embossed relief depicting a giant scaly snake. The reptile was rolled into the shape of a figure eight with its teeth biting its own tail.
Ciri had seen a similar representation but could not remember where it was.
Here you see the snake Uroboros said the elf. It is the symbol of infinity eternal departure and eternal returns. It has neither beginnings nor ends. Time is like Uroboros. Time is the passing moments like grains of sand in an hourglass. We try to measure acts and events but Uroboros reminds us that every moment in every deed and every event lurks in the past the present and the future – in short eternity. Every departure is also returning every welcome is also a goodbye. Everything is simultaneously the beginning and the end.
And you… the elf said but did not look at the girl. Youre the beginning and the end. And because there was a question of destiny know that this is your destiny. Being the beginning and the end. Do you understand?
Ciri hesitated a few seconds. But the vehement look from Auberon forced her to reply.
I understand.
Take off your clothes he said it so casually and carelessly she nearly exploded with anger. With trembling hands she began to unbutton her bodice. The bodice was tight and she had trouble with the hooks and buttons with her clumsy fingers. Although Ciri was in a hurry to get it over with it took her a long time to take off her clothes. But the elf gave no sense of hurry. As if indeed he had all eternity.
Who knows she thought. Maybe he does.
Once she was naked she shifted from foot to foot the ground was cold. Auberon realised and wordlessly he pointed to the bed. The bedspread were mink. Extensively formed by many skins sewn together. Warm soft and comfortable.
He lay beside her dressed from head to toe even with boots on.
When he touched her she could not help but stiffen and was angry with herself as she was determined to show him she was proud and distant to the end. Her teeth needless to say chattered slightly. But the elfs electrifying touch calmed her and his fingers began to teach and give orders. To give directions. In time she began to assimilate so well to his indications she could almost anticipate them. She closed her eyes and imagined it was Mistle who was at her side. But it did not work because he was not at all like Mistle.
His hand taught her what to do. She obeyed. Even happily. Hastily.
He did not hurry. His touch was like soft silk. He made her moan. Biting her lip. He got her whole body to contract in a violent spasm.
What he did then she did not expect.
He got up and walked away. Leaving her flushed panting and trembling.
He did not even look at her.
Ciris blood rushed to her face and forehead. She curled up on the mink bedspread. And began to sob in anger shame and humiliation.
The next morning she sought out Avallach and found him at the rear of the palace. He walked along the row of statues that depicted to her surprise elven children. In various mainly playful poses. Especially the one with which the elf was interested in – a little boy with his mouth contorted in anger with clenched fists standing on one leg.
Ciri stared at it for a long time she felt a dull pain in her stomach. Only when Avallach urged her she told him everything. Fragmented and with frequent omissions.
He said the elf when she had finished has seen the smoke from the fires of more than six hundred and fifty Saovines. Believe me Swallow thats a lot even for the People of the Alders.
And what do I care? She snapped. We have a contract! Have your relatives the dwarves not told you what a contract is? I fulfilled my obligations! I surrendered! What does it matter to me if he cannot or will not? What do I care if he had impotence or is not attracted to me? Maybe he abhors Dhoine? What if like Eredin when he see me he see a gold nugget in a pile of manure?
I hope Avallachs face lost its usual calm and changed you didnt tell him something like that?
I did not say anything. And not for lack of desire.
Be careful. You do not know what you risk.
I do not care. We had an agreement and I am free.
Be careful Zireael repeated Avallach noting the enraged expression on the statue of the boys face. Do not behave like that here. Watch every word. Make an effort to understand. And if there is anything you do not understand then do not use it as an excuse to act precipitously. Be patient. Remember that time is of no importance.
For me it is!
I told you not to behave like a stubborn child. Ill repeat – be patient with Auberon. It is your only chance at freedom.
Really? She shouted. Im beginning to have my doubts! Im beginning to suspect that youve tricked me! That you have all deceived me…
I promised Avallachs face was a dead as the stone of the statues that you will return to your world. Ive given my word. To doubt ones word is a very serious offence for the Aen Elle. To avoid you occurring such an offence I propose that we settle this talk.
He went to leave but Ciri blocked his way. He narrowed his aquamarine eyes and Ciri realised that she was dealing with a very dangerous elf. But it was too late to go back.
It is typical of an elf she hissed like a snake to offend someone and not allow the other to take revenge.
Be careful Swallow!
Listen to me she lifted her head proudly. Your King of the Alders is unable to comply to me that is more than clear. No matter if it is his problem or if Im guilty. That is not important. But I want to enforce the agreement. I want to get it over with. So let someone else get me with child which you care so much about.
You do not know what youre talking about.
And if the problem is me she did not change her tone or expression that means youve made a mistake. Avallach. Youve brought the wrong person to your world.
You do not know what you mean Zireael.
If he abhors me well use the method that horse breeders use. Do you know how they do it? They take a mare to the stallion and then blindfold it and put a donkey in front of it.
Avallach did not even deign to reply. He unceremoniously ducked and walked down the row of statues.
Or maybe you? She screamed. Do you want me to give myself to you! What do you say? Are you not willing to make that sacrifice? But you say I have the eyes of Lara!
He stood beside her in two leaps his hands shot out like snakes and closed around her neck like steel tongs. She realised that if he wanted to he could choke her like a little bird.
He released her. Then leaned over and looked into her eyes at close range.
Who are you he asked very quietly to dare to so profane her name? Who are you to dare insult me with so miserable a pittance? Oh I know I can see who you are. Youre the daughter of Lara Dorren. You are the daughter of Cregennan you are an inconsiderable arrogant narcissistic dhoine a representative example of a race that knows nothing but that has to ruin and destroy everything who can defile with a touch alone and befoul with a mere thought. Your ancestors stole my love from me smug and ruthlessly took her away. But you are worthy to be his daughter I will not let you take my memories of her away. He turned away. Ciri overcame the resistance from her squashed larynx.
Avallach.
He looked at her.
Forgive me. I behaved stupidly and miserably. Forgive me. And if you can forget it.
He walked over to her and hugged her.
Its forgotten he said kindly. No more talk about the matter.
That night when she appeared in the royal apartments freshly bathed perfumed and with her hair combed. Auberon sat at a table leaning over a chess board. Wordlessly he invited her to sit in front of him.
He won in ten moves.
The second time they played she was white but he won in eleven moves.
Only then did he look up showing his clear eyes so unique.
Undress please.
At least she had to acknowledge one thing – he acted with tact and never rushed.
When as on the previous occasion he rose from the bed and left without saying anything Ciri took it calmly and resignedly. Although she could not fall asleep until almost sunrise.
But when the first rays of dawn lit the windows she fell asleep and had a very strange dream.
Vysogota was hunched over washing algae from his muskrat traps. In the wind they dry reeds rustled.
I feel guilty Swallow. It was I who pushed you to the idea of this mad escapade. And I who pointed you the way to that cursed tower.
Do not feel bad Old Crow. If not for that tower Bonhart would have gotten me. Here at least I am safe.
Youre not safe here.
Vysogota straightened up.
Behind him Ciri could see a hill bare and rounded protruding from the grass like the bent back of a monster lurking in ambush. On the hill was a giant boulder. In addition to the rock stood two figures. A woman and a girl. The wind tugged at the womans black hair.
On the horizon lightning flashed.
Chaos stretches its hand towards you daughter. Child of the Elder Blood. You are entangled in movement and change in Destruction and Renewal. Chaos wants this power and it does not know if it is a tool to be used or an object in its plans. Not knowing if chance will make you a grain of sand in the gears of the clock of Fate. Chaos is afraid Child Surprise. He wants to make you afraid too. Therefore he sends you dreams.
Vysogota again hunched over and cleaned another trap. He is dead Ciri thinks cooly. Does that mean that here in the afterlife the dead are forced to clear muskrat traps?
Vysogota straightens up. Behind him the sky glows from the reflection of burning fires.
Across the plains rush thousands of horsemen in red coats – Dearg Ruadhri.
Listen carefully Swallow. The Elder Blood that runs through your veins confers immense authority. You are the Lady of Space and Time. You have a vast power. Do not let criminals and scoundrels snatch it and use it for their ignoble purpose. Fight back! Take it away from their thieving hands and wicked intentions!
It is easy to say! I am trapped here by some barrier or magical bond…
Youre the Lady of Space and Time. Nobody can imprison you.
Behind Vysogota is a plateau a rocky plain covered in the wrecks of ships. Dozens of wrecks. And looking back further black menacing toothed battlements rising over a mountain lake.
Theyll die without your help Swallow. Only you can save them.
Yennefers lips broken torn move without making a sound shedding blood. Her violet eyes burn within her haggard face her matted black hair falls around her dirty face. In a hole in the floor is a stinking puddle there are rats everywhere. The walls of stone are cold. Chains bind her wrists and ankles…
Yennefers fingers are a mass of clotted blood.
Mother! What have they done?
Marble stairs led down. Three flights of stairs.
Vaesse deireadh aep eigean… Something ends…What?
Stairs. Below a fire burns in braziers. Burning tapestries.
Come on Geralt says. Down the stairs. We have to. Yes you have to. There is no other way. Only those stairs. I want to see the sky.
His lips do not move. They are bruised and stained with blood. Blood blood everywhere… The stairs covered in blood…
There is no other way. There isnt Star Eyes.
How? How can I help them? I am in another world? I am a prisoner! I cannot do anything!
No one can imprison you. Everything has already been covered says Vysogota. Even this. Look at your feet.
Ciri sees with horror that she is standing in a sea of bones. Among skulls tibias and bones.
Only you can prevent this from happening Star Eyes.
Vysogota straightens up. Behind him winter and snow. The wind blows and whistles.
Before her in a blizzard on a horse is Geralt. Ciri knows it But his head is covered in a fur cap and a woollen scarf covers his face. Behind him in the blizzard loom other riders their lines are blurred so thickly bundled that it is impossible to discern what they are.
Geralt looks straight at her. But he does not see her. Snow pours into his eyes.
Geralt! Its me! Here!
He does not see her. Cannot hear her over the howling of the storm.
Geraaaalt!
Sheep Geralt says. It was probably just sheep. Lets go back. The riders disappear melting into the falling snow.
Geraaaaaalt! Noooooo!
She woke up.
In the morning she went straight to the stable without breakfast. She did not want to run into Avallach did not want to talk to him. She wanted to escape questioning curious intrusive elves and their glances. Unlike any other matter they were clearly not indifferent regarding the royal bedchamber. Elves did not know how to hide their curiosity and Ciri had no doubt that the palace walls had ears.
She found Kelpie in her stall and brought up her saddle and harness. Before she could start saddling the mare there appeared the little grey elves two heads shorter than the Aen Elle.
With smiles and bows they went to work.
Thank you she said. I could have done it myself but thank you. You are nice.
The closest elf smiled and Ciri flinched. In her smile she saw canine teeth.
She approached her in a hurry. Then Ciri almost fell down in shock. She brushed the hair from the servants ear. An ear that did not end in a point.
Youre a human!
The servant fell to her knees on the swept floor. All the others knelt too. Bowing their heads. Expecting punishment.
I… Ciri began while fingering the reins. I…
She didnt know what to say. The servants were still kneeling. The horses snorted and stamped restlessly in the stables.
Even outside in the saddle at a trot she could not muster any ideas. Human females. As maids servants but no matter. The main thing was that even in this world there are Dhoine…
Human she corrected herself. I think as they do.
She was jarred from her thoughts by Kelpies loud whinny. She lifted her head and saw Eredin. He sat on his dark brown stallion now free from his demonic combat gear. The rider however wore chainmail under his red jacket.
The stallion screamed a hoarsely welcome shook his head and grinned at Kelpie with yellow teeth. Kelpie true to the principle that there are some issues that ventilate with the lords not the servants tried to put her teeth into the elfs thigh.
Ciri held the reins tightly.
Be careful she warned. Keep your distance. My mare does not like strangers. And she bites.
Those that bite he measure her with a supercilious look should be curried with an iron brush. Until they bleed. This is the proven method for treating defiance. Not just for mares.
He jerked his reins so hard and violently the horse grunted and backed away a few steps from his mouth trickled foam.
Whats with the chainmail? The girl measured the elf in return. Are you going to war?
On the contrary I long for peace. Your mares vices aside does it have any virtues?
What kind?
Maybe speed. Well have a race?
If you want why not she stood in the stirrups. There in the direction of those cromlechs…
No he interrupted. Not that way.
Why not?
It is forbidden ground.
To everyone of course.
Not for everyone of course. Your company Swallow is too valuable to us to risk that youll lose it. On your initiative or at the initiative of others.
On the initiative of others? Youre not thinking about unicorns?
I do not want to bore you with what I think. Nor be frustrated by the fact that you would not be able to understand my thoughts.
I do not understand.
I know that you do not understand. Evolution has not provided you with a sufficiently developed brain to understand. Listen if you want to race then I suggest we do so along the river. That way. To Porphyry Bridge the third downstream then to the other shore and further downstream to the mouth of the river. Ready?
Always.
With a cry the elf spurred the stallion which took off like a hurricane before Kelpie had even started they had the advantage. But though the earth was trembling in its wake the stallion could not match Kelpie. The mare overtook him just before reaching the bridge. The bridge was narrow. Eredin gave a cry and the stallion incredibly accelerated. Ciri immediately grasped what was going on. The bridge would not for anything in the world fit two horses. One had to slow down.
Ciri had no intention of slowing down. She clung to the mane and Kelpie pulled forward like an arrow. Ciri brushed the stirrup of the elf and flew onto the bridge. Eredins stallion screamed reared up and struck an alabaster figure it fell from its pedestal and smashed into pieces.
Ciri giggling like a ghost galloped across the bridge without looking back.
At the mouth of the river she dismounted and waited.
He came at last trotting calmly with a smile.
My appreciation he said dismounting for the mare and its rider.
Although proud as a peacock she careless spat.
Ah! You should think about being combed with iron until you bleed.
Unless you have consent he smiled ambiguously. There are mares who like strong caresses.
Quite recently she looked at him defiantly you likened me to a pile of manure. And now youre talking about caresses?
Eredin approached Kelpie rubbed and patted her neck and looked surprised to see that the mare was dry. Kelpie abruptly withdrew her head and let out a prolonged shriek. Eredin turned to Ciri. If he also gives me a pat she thought He will regret it.
Come with me please.
They walked along a stream running down a steep densely forested slopes that led up to stairs made of rundown sandstone. The stairs were aged cracked and torn by tree roots. All around them was forest a primeval forest where there were many old ash and hornbeam yew trees maples and oaks there feet tangled in hazel bushes. It smelled of sage nettle wet stones spring and mildew.
Ciri walked quietly without haste and with easy breaths. She also had her nerves under control. She had no idea what Eredin wanted from her but she did not have the best feelings.
Above the rock step from which fell a narrow waterfall was a stone terrace. On it shaded by elderberry bushes was a gazebo wrapped in ivy. Below she could see the trees the ribbon of the river and the roofs terraces and colonnades of Tir Na Lia.
They were silent for a while watching the scene.
Nobody told me Ciri was the first to break the silence the name of the river.
Easnadh.
The Sigh? Nice. And this stream.
Tuathe.
Whisper. Also nice. Why did no one tell me humans lived in this world?
Because that information is completely irrelevant to you. Lets go to the gazebo.
What for?
Lets go.
The first thing she noticed after entering was the wooden couch. Ciri felt her temples begin to throb.
Sure she thought it was to be expected. I read a book in the temple about an affair written by Anna Tiller. It was about an old king the queen and the young duke from power hungry contenders. Eredin is ruthless ambitious and determined. He knows that the one who is with the queen is the true king. A real man. He who possess the queen possess the kingdom. Here on this couch starts a coup…
The elf sat at a marble table and pointed for Ciri to take a second chair. The view from the window seemed to be of more interest to him that she was and he was not looking at the couch at all.
Here you will stay forever he said my light butterfly. Until the end of your life.
She said nothing. She looked into his eyes intently.
There was nothing in those eyes.
You will not be allowed to leave here he continued. They are unwilling to admit despite the prophecy and myth youre nobody youre nothing only a creature without importance. Believe it they will not let you go. They promised it to you just to deceive you and to provide you your tractability. They never intended to make good on their promise. Never.
Avallach she said hoarsely he gave his word. Doubting an elfs word is apparently an insult.
Avallach is Aen Saevherne. The Knowing ones have their own code of honour which with many noble phrases conceal an old rule that the end justifies the means.
I dont understand why you are telling me all this. Unless… You have something you want from me. You want to barter. What is it? Eredin? My freedom… For what?
He stared at her for a long time. And she vainly sought in his eyes some indication of a signal a sign anything.
Undoubtedly he began slowly you already know little enough about Auberon. You certainly already noticed that he is ambitious. There are things that hell never accept never take note of. Hed sooner die.
Ciri was silent biting her lip and glancing at the couch.
Auberon Muircetach said the elf never uses magic or other means able to change a situation. But such means exist. Good strong guaranteed resources. Much more reliable than the pheromones that Avallachs maids blend into your perfume.
He quickly ran his hand over the veined marble table. When he removed his hand there was a bottle of grey-green jade.
No Ciri gasped. I will not. Absolutely not.
You did not let me finish.
Do not take me for a fool. I will not give him what is in this flask. I wont do those kind of things.
You draw to hasty conclusions he said calmly looking into her eyes in this race you are overtaking yourself. Something like that always ends in a fall. A very painful fall.
I said no!
Think it over. Regardless of what the bottle contains you always come out ahead Swallow.
No!
With a quick and smooth motion like a magician the elf make the bottle disappear from the table. The he looked again at the river Easnadh which meandered thought the trees gleaming.
Youll die here butterfly he said. They will not let you go. But the decision is up to you.
Ive made a covenant. For my freedom…
Freedom he spat. You are still talking about freedom. What would you do if you finally regained it? Where would you go? Do you realise that you are on our world at the moment not only in space but time. Time flows differently here than there. Those whom you knew as children are now elderly those who you once knew have long since died.
I do not believe it.
Remember your legends. Legends about people missing and returning after a year only to see the graves of their relatives covered by grass. Are you going to say that they were pure fantasy things taken from stories? You are wrong. For centuries people have been kidnapped snatched by riders by the Wild Hunt. Abducted exploited and then thrown away like an empty shell once consumed. But do not expect to be that lucky Zireael. You will die here you will not see the graves of your friends.
I do not believe what you say.
That is your personal thing. You chose your destiny. Lets go back. I want to ask you something Swallow. Would it be ok to have a meal together before going back to Tir Na Lia?
For a few heartbeats hunger fought fascination and anger fear of poising and a general dislike.
Id be happy to. She looked down. Thank you for the invitation.
Thank you. Lets go.
Upon leaving the gazebo she looked back at the couch and thought that Anna Tiller was probably a fool and exalted graphomanic.
Slowly silently between the smell of mint sage and nettle they went down the stairs.
Down the banks of the stream which was called Whisper.
That night when she entered the royal apartments perfumed her hair still wet after bathing she found Auberon on a couch leaning over a thick book. Without words with a simple gesture he invited her to sit beside him.
The book was richly illustrated. In fact all that were in it were illustrations. Although Ciri tried to play the sophisticated lady she felt her cheeks flush. In the temple library in Ellander she had seen similar works. But the book the King of the Alders had those others could not compete in wealth or the variety of items or the artistry of the imagery.
They viewed it in silence for a long time.
Take off your clothes please.
This time he too undressed. His body was lean and boyish almost like Giselher Kayleigh or Reef who she had often seen naked as they bathed together in rivers or lakes.
However the Rats radiated youth the joy of life around them sparkling like drops of water.
For him the King of the Alders throbbed cold eternity.
He was patient. Several times it seemed that he was about to. But nothing came of it. Ciri was angry with herself she thought her ignorance or inexperience was to blame. He recognised this and calmed her. As always effectively. And she fell asleep.
In the morning her was not with her.
The next night for the first time the King of the Alders showed signs of impatience. Ciri found him leaning over a table where there was a mirror set in a frame of amber. There was a white powder on the mirror.
Here we go thought Ciri.
With a knife Auberon was gathering the fisstech and distributing it into two strips. He took a tube of silver off of the table and inhaled the drug through the nose first by his left nostril then his right. His eyes usually bright seemed off and turbid and filled with tears. Ciri immediately realised this was not the first dose.
He made two new lines on the glass and with a gesture invited her over passing the tube.
What does it matter she thought it will be easier.
The drug was incredibly strong.
For a while they sat side by side on the bed and stared at the moon with watery eyes. Ciri sneezed.
Lacing night she said wiping her nose with her silk sleeve.
Magic he corrected her rubbing his eyes. Ensheass not enleass. You have to pay attention to the pronunciation.
Ill be careful.
Take off your clothes.
At first it seemed that everything would be okay that the drug had excited him the same way that she was excited. She came alive and took the initiative while even whispering some indecent words. That made him react and the effect was tangible and Ciri was sure that this time surely…
Again it did not work.
And then he became impatient. He got up and threw a sable fur around his shoulders. He stood there turned towards the window and stared at the moon. Ciri sat up and wrapped her arms around her knees. She was frustrated and annoyed but unusually vigorous.
Undoubtedly it was the effects of the strong narcotics.
Its my fault she said. The scar has disfigured me. I know what you see when you look at me. There is not much elf in me. A gold nugget in a pile of manure…
He whirled.
You are extraordinarily modest he said. I would say rather a pearl in pig manure. A diamond on a rotting finger of a corpse. The language could devise other comparisons. Tomorrow Ill ask about them little dhoine. A human in which there is absolutely nothing elven.
He went to the table picked up the tube and bent over the mirror. Ciri sat as if made from stone. She felt as if someone had spat upon her.
I do not come here out of love! She snapped angrily. I come under blackmail and you know it! But I agreed to do it for…
For who? He interrupted hotly unlike your typical elf. For me? For the Aen Seidhe trapped in your world? You stupid girl! You do it for yourself you come here in vain trying to give. Because it is your only hope your only hope of salvation. Ill tell you again – pray pray fervently to your human god idols or totems. Because if it is not me then it will be Avallach and his laboratory. You cannot even imagine what it would mean for you to go there and submit to the alternative.
I dont care Ciri said in a muffled voice curling up on the bed. I agreed to everything just to regain my freedom. To be able to finally rid myself of you. To leave. To my world. To my friends.
Your friends! He sneered. Here is your friend!
Suddenly he turned and threw the fisstech covered mirror.
Here is your friend he repeated. Look closely.
He left the room the sable fur trailing on the ground.
She looked into the mirror and saw only her blurred reflection. But almost immediately the mirror brightened and filled with smoke. And then an image.
Yennefer hanging in an abyss her arms raised taunt above her head. The sleeves of her dress are like the outstretched wings of a bird. Her hair is wavy and fish swim among it. A whole school of fish flicker around her. Some start to nibble at the cheeks and eyes of the sorceress. From Yennefers legs a rope leads down to the bottom of a lake trapped between the mud and seaweed a large basket of stones. Above in the sky the sun shines down on the face of the water.
Yennefers dress ripples around her like seaweed.
The smoke obscures the surface of the mirror stained with fisstech.
Geralt pale as glass his eyes closed is still frozen under some long icicles hanging from rocks and will soon be buried by the blizzard. His white hair is now a mass of ice a white frost envelops his eyebrows eyelashes and lips. The snow will not stop falling on Geralt it surrounds him covering his legs and shoulders with a soft blanket.
The blizzard howls and whistles…
Ciri jumped up and slammed the mirror hard against the wall. The amber frame burst and the glass shattered.
She recognised these kind of vision she remembered them and knew what they were. Her old dreams.
This is not true she cried. You hear me Auberon! I dont believe it! Its a lie! A deception! Its just your anger helpless at yourself! Its your anger…
She sat down on the floor and began to cry.
She suspected that the walls of the palace had ears. The next day she could not endure the looks directed at her she felt like they were laughing at her back. Avallach was nowhere to be found.
He knows she thought what happened and is trying to avoid me. Before I got up he probably got far away by land or by river with his gold makeup elf. He doesnt want to talk to me doesnt want to recognise that all of his plans have collapsed.
She could also not find Eredin. But that was quite normal – he was often out of the city accompanied by his Dearg Ruadhri his Red Riders.
Ciri went and got Kelpie from the stables and went across the river. She was deep in thought and took no notice to anything around her.
I have to escape. It does not matter if those visions were true or false. On things is certain – Yennefer and Geralt are far away in my world and my place is with them. I have to get away get out of here as quickly as possible. There must be some possibility. The same way I got here O have to get myself out of here. Eredin suggested that I have a wild talent and Vysogota thought the same thing. I examined every corner of Tor Zireael I found no portal no exit. But maybe there is another tower somewhere…
She looked to the horizon and saw a remote hill on whose summit towered against the sky silhouettes of cromlechs. A forbidden area she thought. Ha I can see that it is too far.
The barrier will probably not let me get there. It would be pointless exertion. Id rather head up the river Ive never been there…
Kelpie snorted shook her head and stamped her feet. She did not turn around instead she started trotting towards the hill. Ciri was stunned for a moment to the point that she did not respond and let the mare run. Only after a while did she shout and pull on the reins. The result was that Kelpie reared kicked and galloped onwards. Still in the same direction.
Ciri did not try and stop her or try and control her. She was amazed. She knew Kelpie very well. The mare had quirks but not like this. This behaviour must mean something.
Kelpie slowed to a trot. She went up the side of the hill crowned with the cromlechs. A league or so Ciri thought. The magic barrier will start to work soon.
The mare walked into the circle of stones formed by a series of monoliths fallen and mossy very close together which arose though the brambles and suddenly sank into the ground. She did not move a muscle except her ears which stretched to hear better.
Ciri tried to turn her around and move. But it was in vain. If it wasnt from her neck veins throbbing hot she would have sworn she was sitting on a statue of a horse.
Suddenly she felt something on her shoulders something sharp that went through her clothes and prodded her hurting. Something was behind her. Emerging from behind some rocks making no noise appeared a unicorn with a red coat with precise movements it thrust its horn under her armpit. Hard. Sharply. She felt blood trickle from her side.
From the other side emerged another unicorn. This one was completely white from the tips of its ears to the end of its tail. Only his nostrils were pink and his eyes black. He approached her from the side slowly and very carefully put his head in her lap. The excitement was so strong that Ciri moaned.
Ive grown up a voice echoed in her head. Ive grown up Star Eyes. Then in the desert I did not know how to behave. Now I know.
Little horse? She moaned almost hanging from the two horns that were clicking together.
My name is Ihuarraquax. Do you remember me Star Eyes? Do you remember how you healed me? How you saved me?
He stepped back and turned around. Ciri could see a trace of a scar on his leg. She recognised him. She remembered him.
Little horse! It is you! But you had a different coat… Youve grown up.
Suddenly then was confusion in her head whispers voices shouts and whinnies. The horns drew back. She saw that the other unicorn behind her back coat was blue.
The older ones are learning from you Star eyes. Through me they are learning from you.
A little more and theyll be able to speak for themselves. Soon they will tell you what they expect from you.
The cacophony in Ciris head exploded in an indescribable riot. But soon it relented and began to flow like a stream of thoughts clear and understandable.
We want to help you escape Star Eyes.
She was silent but her heart pounded in her chest.
Where is the crazy joy? Where is the thanks?
Where she asked aggressively does this sudden urge to help me come from? Perhaps I failed to win your love?
You have our love. But this is not your world. There is no place for you here.
She clenched her teeth. Although encouraged by the sudden hope she shook her head dismissively. Little horse – Ihuarraquax – ears pricked up stamped his hooves and stared at her with his black eyes. The red unicorn stamped until the earth trembled and shook menacingly. He snorted angrily and Ciri understood.
You do not trust us.
I do not trust you she said coldly. Everyone here plays their game and I who dont know the rules am being used. Why should I believe you now? Between you and the elves apparently there is no friendship I saw it there in the wilderness and there was almost a fight. I can safely assume that you want to use me to annoy the elves. I also do not like them they imprisoned me and forced me to do something that I did not want. But I will not let you use me.
Red shook his head his horn again made a dangerous move. Blue whinnied. Ciris skull thudded and picked up their thoughts which were ominous.
Oh she said. Youre just like them. Be obedient and show humility or violence and death! Im not afraid. I will not be used!
She felt chaos and confusion in her head. It lasted for a while until from the chaos emerged legible thoughts.
Thats fine Star Eyes you do not like being used. That is precisely our idea. What we want no more no less is to guarantee that. For you and for ourselves. And the entire world.
In all worlds.
I dont understand.
Youre a dangerous weapon a threat. We cannot let that weapon fall into the hands of the King of the Alders the Fox and Sparrowhawk.
Who? She said Oh…
The King of the Alders is an elder. But the Fox and Sparrowhawk cannot gain mastery over the Ard Gaeth the Gate of Worlds. Once they had it. And then lost it. Now all they can do is wander between the worlds as impotent ghosts. The Fox has reached Tir Na Bea Arainne and Sparrowhawk and his riders can get to the Sprial. They do not have the strength to go anywhere else. Thats why they dream of Ard Gaeth and power. We can show you how to use that power. Ill show you Star Eyes when you leave here.
I cant escape from here. I cant get past the magic barrier – Geas Garadh.
You cannot be imprisoned. You are the Lady of the Worlds.
No. I have no special talent I have no control over anything. And I renounced my powers a year ago back in the desert. Little horse witnessed it.
In the desert you gave up only insignificant quackery. The power that is in your blood you cannot give up. It is with you all the time. We will teach you how to use it.
And it is not by chance she cried that this power that gives dominion over worlds you want me to give to you?
Not so. We do not need to gain this power. For we have had it forever.
Trust them Ihuarraquax requested. Trust them Star Eyes.
On one condition.
The Red unicorn abruptly raised his head opened his nostrils and she could swear his eyes threw sparks. They will not like it Ciri thought when I give them the condition they do not even like the sound of the word. The Plague I do not know what Im doing… I hope this doesnt end in tragedy…
We are listening. What is this condition?
Ihuarraquax will come with me.
That evening the sky became cloudy and it became muggy from the river rose a thick stick mist. When it became dark from afar came muffled thunder and lightning lit up the horizon.
Ciri had long been prepared. Dressed in black riding clothes with her sword on her back tense and impatient waiting for the coming of night. When it came she silently walked through deserted halls and stealthily took arcades and descended terraces. The willow rustled down by the River Easnadh.
In the sky distant thunder rolled.
Ciri got Kelpie from the stables. The mare knew what was expected of her and obediently trotted towards Porphyry Bridge. Ciri stared for a moment behind her looking at the terrace where the boats were moored.
I cant she thought. I have to see him again. Maybe it will succeed in delaying pursuit.
Its risky But it cannot be helped.
At first she thought he was not there that the royal apartments were empty the silence and stillness were absolute.
After a moment she saw him. He was in a corner sitting on a couch with a white shirt that exposed his narrow shoulders. The fabric was so delicate that if clung to his body as if wet. The face and hands of the King of the Alders were almost as white as his shirt.
He looked up at her those eyes were empty.
Shiadhal? He whispered. Thank goodness youre here. You know they have been saying that youre dead.
He opened his hand and something fell to the carpet. It was the grey-green bottle.
Lara the King of the Alders shook his head and touched his neck as if the golden royal torch was choking him. Caemm a me Luned. Come to me daughter. Caemm a me elaine.
His breath smelled of death.
Elaine blath fainne wedd… he crooned. Look luned you have untied your ribbon… Let me…
He tried to raise his hand but he failed. He sighed deeply raised his hand abruptly and looked into her eyes. This time they were alive.
Zireael he said Lodhlaith you are destined to be the Lady of the Lake and mine as it turns out.
Vaesse deireadh aep eigean… he said after a moment and Ciri in horror realised that his movements and words had begun to slow.
But he added with a sigh it is a good thing that something also begins.
Through the window came the lengthy sound of thunder. The storm was still far away.
But it was fast approaching.
Yet spoke the king I have no desire to die Zireael. And I find it terribly sad that it has to happen. Who would have thought. I thought that I would have no regrets. I have lived a long time I have known everything. Im bored of it all… However now I feel regret. And do you want to know something else? Come closer I whisper it. Let it be our secret.
Ciri leaned forward.
Im afraid he whispered.
I know.
Are you with me?
I am.
Va Faill Luned.
Goodbye King of the Alders!
She sat beside him still holding his hand after his breathing hushed and ceased. She did not wipe away her tears. She let them flow.
The storm was approaching. On the horizon lightning burned.
She ran down the marble staircase to the pier at which the boats bobbed. She untied one of them which she had set her eye on that evening. She left the pier pushing off with a mahogany pole that had previously been used to hang curtains. She doubted the fact that the boat would obey her commands like it did Avallach.
The boat glided silently downstream. Tir Na Lia was dark and quiet. Only the status on the terraces gazed at her with dead eyes. Ciri was counting bridges.
The sky above lit up with a flash of lightning. After a second thundered rumbled across the sky.
The third bridge.
Something flashed across the bridge quiet agile like a big black rat. It rocked the boat when it jumped into the bow. Ciri dropped the pole and drew her sword.
I see hissed Eredin Breacc Glas you want to deprive us of your company?
He also drew his sword. During a brief lightning flash she was able to see the weapon.
The blade was single-edged slightly curved with polished finish and uniformly sharp. The hilt was long and the hand-guard was a circular plate. She could see right away that the elf knew how to use the sword.
Unexpectedly he rocked the boat stomping on the side. Ciri deftly balanced by tilting her hips with the movements of the boat and in turn used the same trick when he jumped with both feet on the opposite side. He did not lose his balance either.
He attacked. She parried his lunge rather instinctively because in the dark she could barely see. She returned his attack with a quick bottom cut. Eredin parried and struck out again Ciri deflected the blow. From the blades sparks flew.
Again he rocked the boat. Ciri spread her arms and balanced on the bench. He stepped towards the bow and lowered his sword.
Where did you learn all this Swallow?
Youd be surprised.
I doubt it. The river can overcome the barrier. Did you figure this out yourself or did someone advise you?
I doesnt matter.
Yes it does. And well find out. We have our ways. But now drop the sword and return.
Never.
We are going back Zireael. Auberon is waiting. I guarantee that tonight he will be full of desires and requests.
I doubt it she said. He overdosed on the stimulant you gave him. Or was it meant to do something else entirely?
What are you talking about?
Hes dead.
He quickly shook off his surprise and lunged at her rocking the boat. She balanced and exchanged a few angry cuts the water carried the sound of the vibrant clash of steel on steel.
Lightning lit up the night. Another bridge passed overhead.
One of the last of Tir Na Lias bridges. Or is it the last?
Surely you realise Swallow he said hoarsely that you are only delaying the inevitable. I cannot let you leave.
Why? Auberon is dead. And Im nobody and of no importance. It was you who told me that.
Because that is the truth he said raising his sword. You mean nothing. You are a tiny moth which I can crush between my two fingers into silver powder. But if left alone you can do irreparable damage to the most precious fabric. You are nothing. Nothing but annoying.
Lightning flashed again. In the light Ciri could see what she wanted to see. The elf had his sword raised and waving pointing to the back of the boat. He had the height advantage.
She had to win the next attack.
You dared to take up arms against me Zireael. Its too late to regret or forgive something like that. I will not kill you. But a few weeks in bed with bandages will do you good.
Hold on. I want to say something else. I want to reveal a secret.
What do you have to tell me? He laughed. What pathetic secret?
This that you will not fit under this bridge.
Without any time to react he hit the bottom of the bridge and flew forward losing his balance completely. Ciri could simply throw him out of the boat however that was not enough and she was afraid that he would continue his pursuit. Moreover he intentionally or by negligence killed the King of the Alders. And he had to feel pain.
She stabbed him in the thigh just below the chainmail. He did not even scream. He jumped overboard into the river and the waters closed over him.
She turned back to see what was going to happen. It took a long time before he floated to the top. In a flash of lightning she watched him made his way to the shore and remain lying in the mud and blood.
A few weeks in bed in bandages she muttered will do you good.
She grabbed the pole and pushed hard. The Easnadh river was getting more rough the boat ran faster. Soon she left the last of the buildings of Tir Na Lia behind.
She did not look back.
At first it was very dark the boat sailed through the old forest the trees and branches touched together above the river creating a tunnel. Then it began to brighten. The forest ended and on both sides were alders reeds and cattails. In the clear river appeared clusters of aquatic plants drifting on the current. When the lightning flashed she noticed circles on the water and before the thunder drowned out all sound she heard the splashing of startled fish.
Several times not far from the boat she saw big phosphorescent eyes and the boat repeated collided with something big and alive.
Everything in this world seems beautiful but to strangers it means death she silently repeated Eredins words.
The river widened and islands and channels began to appear. She allowed the boat to sail on luck along with the current. But she began to be afraid. What happens If I make a mistake or flow the wrong branch?
While she thought she heard a whinny from Kelpie and hear an intense mental signal from the unicorn.
There you are Little horse!
We must hurry Star Eyes. Follow me.
To my world?
First I have to show you something. I was ordered to by the elders.
They rode firstly through the forest steppe then through densely chopped ravines and gorges. Lightning flashed and thunder boomed. The storm was getting closer and the wind raged.
The unicorn led Ciri to one of the gorges.
It is here.
What is here?
Go down and see.
She obeyed. The ground was uneven and she stumbled. There was a click and something rolled under her feet. There was a flash and Ciri gasped. She was in the middle of a sea of bones.
There had been a landslide probably because of the intensity of the downpours. And it had revealed what it had been hiding. A graveyard. A large mass grave. A huge pile of bones.
Tibiae pelvis ribs femurs. Skulls.
Ciri picked one up.
Again the lightning flashed and she screamed. She knew whose bones were lying here. The skull which had been cleaved by a sharp blade had canines.
Now you know. Now you understand. They did this the Aen Elle the King of the Alders the Fox and Sparrowhawk. This world was not originally their world. They made it theirs when they conquered it. When they opened the Ard Gaeth. With our help because we had been used and abused and now they are trying to use and abuse you.
Ciri threw the skull.
Rogues she cried into the night. Murderers!
Thunder rumbled. Ihuarraquax snorted loudly warningly. She understood. With a single jump she was in the saddle and spurred Kelpie to a gallop.
Following in their footsteps were pursuers.
This is not the first time this has happened she thought feeling the wind in her face as she galloped. Not the first time. This wild ride in the dark in the middle of the night chased by ghosts spectres and apparitions.
Forward Kelpie!
In the glow of the lightning Ciri could see through her watering eyes willows and alders along the trails. But these were not trees. They were hunched monsters coming at her from both sides with their twisted and gnarled limbs rotten laughter coming from a black mouth cavity. Kelpie neighed shrilly and ran so fast it looked like her hooves did not touch the ground.
Ciri laid flat on the back of her neck. Not only to reduce air resistance but also in order to avoid the alder branches that wanted to knock her off or pull her from the saddle. The branches whipped and beat her catching at her clothing and hair. The twisted trunks shook and the cavities snickered.
Kelpie neighed wildly. The unicorn responded. He was a bright white spot in the dark showing her the way.
Ride Star Eyes! Ride as fast as possible!
It became more and more difficult to dodge the alders branches. Very soon they blocked the way.
Behind them they heard shouting. It was the voices of their pursuers.
Ihuarraquax neighed. Ciri received his signal. Understood the importance. She adhered herself to Kelpies neck. She did not need to encourage her the frightened mare ran at a breakneck gallop. And other signal from the unicorn roughly broke into Ciris mind. A council or rather an order.
Jump Star Eyes. You have to jump. To another place another time.
Ciri did not understand but struggled to. She made every effort to understand. She concentrated. Concentrated while whispers and blood pounded in her ears…
Lightning flashed. And then suddenly it was dark soft black darkness without a single beam of light.
Her head ached and there was a buzzing in her ears.
She felt a cool breeze on her face. Drops of rain. The smell of pine. Kelpie snorted and puffed. She was wet and hot. Ciri could see Ihuarraquax. He stood shaking his head and his horn. Pawing at the ground with his hooves.
Little horse?
Im here Star Eyes.
The sky was full of stars. Full of constellations. The Dragon. Lady Winter. The Seven Goats. And low on the horizon – the Eye.
It worked she sighed. We have succeeded Little horse. This is my world!
His tone was so clear that Ciri understood everything.
No Star Eyes. We escaped from them. But this is still not the right place or the right time. You still have a long way to go.
Dont leave me alone.
I will not leave. I owe you a debt. And I will repay it. Until the end.
The wind picked up and the clouds were swept to the west and gradually enveloped the constellations. The Dragon disappeared and after the Lady Winter and the Seven Goats. The brightest and longest glowing was the Eye. Ultimately however it also was covered. On the horizon lightning flashed briefly followed by the sound of thunder. The wind picked up dust.
The storm was once again catching up.
The unicorn whinnied and sent another mental signal.
We must not waste time. Our only hope is a quick getaway. To the right place and the right time. Hurry Star Eyes.
I am the Lady of the Worlds. I am of the Elder Blood. The blood of Lara Dorren daughter of Shiadhal.
Ihuarraquax neighed again prompting her to hurry. Kelpie replied. Ciri pulled on her gloves.
Im ready.
There was a roar in her ears. A flash. Then darkness.
The majority of historians tend to award the process conviction and execution of Joachim de Wett to the violent cruel and tyrannical nature of Emperor Emhyr. Especially some works whose authors have a fondness for literature about revenge and personal reckoning. The time has come to tell the truth a truth that for a thorough researcher is obvious. The Duke de Wett commanded the Verden Operations Group to which the word ineffective is extraordinarily delicate. Although having been arrayed against forces with at least twice their numbers separated from the offensive in the north he directed all of their activities to fighting the Verden guerrillas. The Verden Operations Group committed unheard of atrocities against civilians. The results were easy to foresee and inexcusable – in the winter the insurgent forces were calculated at about five hundred armed men by the spring it was almost the entire country. King Ervyll an imperial ally was murdered and the uprising was led by his son Prince Kistrin a northerner sympathizer. Flanked by the pirates ships of Skellige in front from the Nordlings of Cidaris and from behind by the rebellion de Wett engaged in chaotic battles suffering defeat after defeat. Thus the offensive for the Centre Army Group was delayed. Instead of Verden being bound to the west flank of the armies Centre to enable Menno Coehoorns forces quick action they in fact slowed down their campaign. So there was a delay and disruption of the offensive strategic plan. The Northerner immediately took advantage of the situation and went on the counterattack undoing the siege around Mayenne and Maribor destroying the chances of a rapid re-occupation of these important strengths.
The inefficiency and stupidity of de Wett also had a psychological importance. The myth of the invincibility of Nilfgaard vanished. The army of the northerners began to receive hundreds of volunteers…
Restif de Montholon
The Northern Wars: Myths Lies and Propaganda
CHAPTER SIX
Jarre needless to say was disappointed. The education he received at the temple and his own outgoing personality had led him to have faith in human goodness kindness and selflessness. Now there was not much left of that faith.
He had slept for two nights in the open on the remains of haystacks and now it looked like hed be spending his third night the same way. In each of the villages that he had sought shelter or a crust of bread the gates had been closed up tight and the only responses he received were a deep silence or insults and threats. No matter how he explained who he was and where and for what purpose he was travelling.
He was very very disappointed by people.
It soon grew dark. The boy walked quickly and briskly along a path though some fields. He looked around for a haystack resigned and dejected at the prospect of having to stay another night out in the open. In fact March had been unusually warm but at night it was very cold. And he was afraid.
Jarre looked to the sky which like every night for almost a week you could see a golden and red comet that swept across the sky from west to east dragging behind it a line of fire. He thought about what could cause such a herald a phenomenon mentioned in many prophecies. He took up the march. It was getting darker. The path led down a corridor of thick bushes that became dark terrifying shapes in the shadows of twilight. From below the bushes where darkness reigned blew the cold nasty smell of weeds in a state of putrefaction and something more. Something very bad.
Jarre stopped. He tried to convince himself that what was crawling on his back and shoulders was not fear but cold. It had no effect.
Ahead a low bridge linked the banks of a canal black and shiny as freshly poured tar the banks were covered with reeds willows and deformed ash. In places the bridge had rotten planks and large holes gaped in the deck the railing was broken and the rails were immersed in water. Around the bridge willows grew densely. Although it was still far from real night in the distant meadow behind the canal glowed the ragged bits of mist which clung to the grass and among the willows darkness reigned. Through the darkness Jarre caught a blurry glimpse of the ruins of a building probably a mill or a shack.
I have to cross the bridge thought the young man. Nothing can be done. Although I can feel that something lurks on the other side I have go to the other side of the canal. I have to cross the canal as did the legendary leader or was he a hero? Who I read about in the worn manuscripts at the temple of Melitele. Cross the canal and then… How was it? The cards will be laid out? No I will cast the dice! Behind me is the past before me is spread my future…
He walked to the bridge and immediately saw that his premonition had not failed. Before he saw them he heard them.
Well growled one of those who now stood in his way. Did I not say? A little patience and we have already encountered somebody.
You were right Okultich replied the other. You could set yourself up as a clairvoyant. Well lonesome wanderer relinquish to us everything you have… will you be good or do we have to help?
But I have nothing! Screamed Jarre with all the force in his lungs hoping that someone would hear and come to his aid. I am just a poor traveller! I do not have a penny on me! What can I give you? This stick? My clothing?
That too replied the other with a lisp something in his voice caused Jarre to shudder. So you know poor traveller we expected better loot. Or at least to have fun with a girl from the village. But soon it will be night and now nobody will come. But where there is no fish crab must suffice. Take him guys!
I warn you shouted Jarre. I have a knife!
Indeed he did. He took it with him from the temples kitchen before he fled and hid it in his bag. But he did not reach for it. He was paralysed by the knowledge that it would be an absurd gesture and no one would help.
I have a knife!
Well well! Sneered the man with the lisp approaching. He has a knife. Who would have thought!
Jarre could not flee. Fear had made his legs become two stakes nailed to the ground. Adrenaline had tied him by the neck like a noose.
Hey! Suddenly cried a third voice youthful and somehow familiar. I think I know him! Yes yes I know him! Jarre? Do you recognise me? Its Melfi. Do you remember me Jarre?
I… remember Jarre struggled with all of his strength against a powerful ugly and so far completely unknown to him feeling. Only when he felt pain in his side from hitting the planks on the bride did he realise the sensation. The feeling of the loss of consciousness.
What a surprise! Repeated Melfi. Such a coincidence to meet a native from Ellander. And a friend. Isnt it Jarre?
Jarre swallowed the mouthful of bacon which the strange company had given to him along with some roasted turnips. He did not answer just nodded his head in the direction of all six surrounding the campfire.
What direction are you headed Jarre?
To Vizima.
Ha! We are also headed to Vizima! What a coincidence! What do you say to that Milton? You remember Milton Jarre?
Jarre did not remember. He was not even sure if he had seen him before. Furthermore Melfi too was exaggerating a bit calling him a friend. He was the son of the Cooper in Ellander. They had both attended the minor seminary in the temple Melfi had regularly and severely beat Jarre and called him a bastard conceived of nettles without a mother or father.
It lasted about a year after which the Cooper had taken his son from school and confirmed that the boy was only intended for barrels. That was Melfi – instead of devoting the sweat of his brow to learning the secrets of reading and writing he devoted his sweat and blood in his fathers workshop sanding staves. And when he finished his studies Jarre with a recommendation of the temple found a job as the assistant town clerk and the journeyman cooper bowed deeply to him and assured him of their friendship.
Lets go to Vizima said Melfi. To the army. All of us here as one group. Those there are Milton and Ograbek sons of serfs but have been removed from their obligations you know…
I know Jarre looked at the two young blond villagers who were as alike as brothers.
They conscript one out of ten fiefs. And you Melfi?
With me sighed the cooper mind you this happened – the first time the army came to recruit my father paid them off. But the second time we had to draw straws… well you know…
I know Jarre nodded again. The draw to enlist was decreed by the city council on Ellander the decreed is dated January sixteenth. It was inevitable against the threat of Nilfgaard…
Listen Pike to how he speaks said one husky broad-shouldered lad who had first shouted at Jarre on the bridge. Like some kind of sage.
Wisearse. Fucking know it all contributed another of the companions whose round face was pasted with a stupid grin.
Shut up Klaproth snarled Pike the oldest boy in the group who already boasted narrow droopy moustache. If he is a sage then a man should listen to what he says. It doesnt hurt to learn something. Learning has never hurt anyone. Well almost never. And almost anyone.
What is true is true announced Melfi. Jarre is in fact not stupid. He is a scholar and he learned to read and write in Ellander at the temple of Melitele and takes care of their library.
I wonder Pike looked at Jarre thought the smoke from the fire his eyes glistened like an actual pike in the light of the torch at the bow of a fishing boat what a scholar is doing on the road on the way to Vizima?
Like you said Jarre. Im going to join the army.
Why would some kind of fucking know it all go and join the army? Sanctuaries do not have to supply recruits And every fool knows how to rescue the service and claim to his scribe. What is it then Sir Officer?
Im going to enlist as a volunteer said Jarre. I want to enlist out of choice not mandatory conscription. Partly for personal reasons but mainly from a sense of patriotic duty.
The group burst into loud thundering laughter.
Look guys said Pike after he caught his breath you can find a double temperament in some people seated in contradictions. Two natures. Here is a youngster; he would seem to be well educated and experienced and in addition surely not a born fool. You ought to know what happens in war – someone attacks someone else and kills them. And he like you has joined by their own volition and person reasons and patriotic obligations but joins the losing side.
Nobody said anything. Neither did Jarre.
Such feelings of patriotic obligations said Pike reliably reveal those who are weak in the head. But you also spoke about personal reasons. Im dangerously curious what are these personal motivations?
They are personal said Jarre and Im not going to be talking about them. Id rather you speak of your own reasons.
Pay close attention to what I say Pike said after a moment of silence. You are not talking to some kind of yokel. But do not worry scribe… I will forgive you this time. Ill even answer. Yes Im going into the army and also as a volunteer.
How weak in the head should someone be to join with the losers? Jarre was surprised at his sudden audacity. And on the way stripping travellers on bridges?
Ha Melfi burst out with laughter he still cannot forgive the trap by the stream. Jarre it was just for fun! We were just joking right Pike?
Sure Pike yawned. It was just an innocent prank. Life is sad like a cow being led to the slaughter. People will do anything for fun dont you think scribe?
I think. In principle.
Thats fine Pike did not take his shining eyes off of him. Otherwise you would have had to make the trip to Vizima alone.
Jarre was silent. Pike stretched.
Ive said what I wanted to say. Well guys the fun is at an end it is time to hit the sack. We have until tomorrow evening to get to Vizima we hike at daybreak.
The night was very cold despite his fatigue; Jarre could not sleep curled up under his blanket his knees almost touching his chin. When he finally feel asleep he slept poorly and nightmares plagued him. Upon awakening he remembered only two.
In the first dream he saw the Witcher Geralt or Rivia who occasionally visited mother Nenneke. The witcher sat motionless under icicles hanging from an overhanging rock and was snowed in from a blizzard. In the second dream Ciri was hunched over a horses neck galloping towards a low wall of alders.
Oh yes and just before dawn he dreamed of Triss Merigold. After her last stay in the temple the young man dreamed of the enchantress often. Those dreams had consequences for after waking up he was very ashamed.
This time however nothing of the sort happened. It was just too cold.
In the morning they did indeed march at dawn. Milton and Ograbek the children of serfs added a note of encouragement by singing a military song:
Go on brave warrior!
Your armour rumbles like thunder.
Dont run girl he wants to kiss you.
Just give it to him you wont regret it
After all the handsome soldier is going to fight for us!
Pike Okultich Klaproth and Melfi walked together like lice on a beggar and told silly jokes and anecdotes which in their opinion were outrageously funny:
…And the Nilfgaardian asks Whats that smell? And the Elf says Shit! Ha ha ha!
Hahahahahaha!
Ha ha ha ha! Do you know this one? An elf and a dwarf are going to Nilfgaard…
As time passed they met other travellers on the road walking and driving farm carts merchants and military units. Some vehicles were loaded with food and Pike walked after them with his nose practically pressed to the ground like a retriever collecting anything that fell off the back – a carrot here a potato there and sometimes even some onions. Some of the food they devoured on the spot and some they saved for later.
Jarre was waiting for any chance or reason to separate from them. He did not like Pike or Okultich. He did not like the looks that Pike and Okultich threw the wagons of the merchants who passed or the carts of the farmers with girls and women sitting in the carts. He did not like the mocking tone Pike put on when he spoke of his purpose of volunteering for the military at a time when it was clear and inevitable they would be defeated.
The air smelled of freshly ploughed earth. And smoke. In a valley between the regular checkerboard fields they saw fruit trees and between them the crowns of a thatched roofs.
They heard dogs barking roosters crowing and cattle lowing.
Nice village Pike said. Not too big but neat and rich at first sight.
Here in the valley Okultich hurried to explain halflings have settled. They organise everything neatly. They are diligent stewards.
Non-humans are cursed snarled Klaproth. Fucking kobolds. They are thriving here while everyone else is in poverty. Not even the war affects them.
For now Pikes lip curled back in an ugly grimace. Remember this settlement boys. Remember it well. If we ever wanted to take a look there I would not like to wander.
Jarre turned his head. He pretended not to hear. He watched the road in front of them.
They continued their journey. Ograbek and Milton started singing a new song. Not a military song but something much grimmer. It could have been after Pikes previous references taken as an ominous sign.
People listen and learn the cruelty of death.
Old young or brave
No one escapes the Reaper.
No mercy from his scythe.
He Okultich said quietly must have some money. Ill be damned if he does not have silver.
The subject for whom Okultich had made the bet was a merchant who was travelling along the road walking with a two wheeled wagon being pulled by a donkey.
Money calls money Pike lisped and the little donkey would also be worth something. Lead the way boys.
Melfi Jarre pulled on the coopers sleeve open your eyes! Do you not see what is brewing here?
These are just jokes Jarre Melfi pulled away. They are only joking…
Close up they could see that the cart was also a stall that he could set up in a few moments to spread his wears ready for sale. The cart was covered with a tarpaulin which doubled as a sign that praised the shopkeepers range – protective amulets talismans and scapulars roots and medicinal drugs magic potions and all sorts of spices elixirs and magical poultices precious metal detectors as well as infallible bait for fish ducks and maidens.
The merchant a thin elderly man looked around and saw them swore and urged his donkey forward. But the donkey like any ass did not go faster.
Hes wearing a pretty decent outfit Okultich quietly appreciated. And Im sure well find things in the cart.
Well boys lets get to it Pike commanded while there are few witnesses on the road.
Jarre could not believe his courage when he ran a few quick steps ahead of the gang turned and stood between them and the merchant.
No! He uttered with difficulty as if his throat was being squeezed. I wont let you…
Pike carelessly parted his long cloak and pointed at a knife on his belt which was without a doubt sharp as a razor.
Move aside pen-pusher! Pike lisped with hatred. If you want to save your throat. I thought you were looking for adventures with our company but no I see your temple has made you a prude you stink of incense. Get out of the way now because otherwise…
What is happening here? Huh?
From behind the bushes at the side of the road emerged two eccentric looking figures.
Both men wore waxed moustaches curled upwards that looked like a colourful Danish pastry they wore quilted jackets decorated with ribbons and big soft velvet berets with tufts of feathers. In addition they wore wide belts with hanging daggers and both men wore on their backs two-handed swords about a meter in length with long hilts.
The landsknechts emerged from the bushes after having apparently fulfilled their necessary requirements. Although they behaved with ostentatious carelessness and did not reach towards their swords Pike and Okultich immediately backed away and went limp and Klaproth looked like a deflated bladder.
We… were not… Stammered Pike. Nothing wrong with…
Just a joke whined Melfi.
No one was hurt the old merchant said unexpectedly. So no big deal.
We Jarre said quickly are on our way to Vizima. We have to report for conscription. By chance maybe that is the way you are travelling gentlemen soldiers?
By chance we are chuckled the landsknecht who immediately understood what was going on. We are also going to Vizima. Whoever is interested can go with us. We will be safer together.
In any case the other landsknecht measured Pike and his henchmen with penetrating eyes. I would like to add that we met a sheriffs patrol a short distance away. His men are angry they have to trudge through the country instead of sitting somewhere warm. They are keen to hang any robbers they find on the roads.
Very well Pike recovered and showed his teeth in a fake smile. Very well the law punishes rogues and keeps order. Then let us be on our way to Vizima to the army because patriotic duty calls.
The landsknecht looked at him for a long time and rather contemptuously then shrugged his shoulders adjusted the sword on his back and walked by. His companion Jarre and the merchant and his wagon and donkey followed him and a short distance behind Pikes mob.
I thank you gentlemen soldiers said the merchant driving his donkey. And I thank you your sir.
Youre welcome the landsknecht waved his hand. It happens.
A wide range of people are being recruited for the military said the second fellow looking back over his shoulder. They arrive at a village or a town and order one out of every ten men. Often the first thing they do is take advantage of the opportunity to get rid of the crooks which is worse because then the road become full of robbers. Oh like those back there. However once they reach the training centre a soldier will club some discipline into them. Everyone learns to listen when they are forced to run down a corridor of sticks a few times.
I Jarre was quick to clarify wish to enlist as a volunteer not forced.
I noticed right away the landsknecht looked at him youre a different breed from those rascals. So why are you with them?
Chance brought us together.
I have seen many such pairings said the experienced soldier seriously which together by chance led them to the gallows. Take a lesson from that my boy.
I will.
Before the clouds obscured sun stood at its zenith they reached the highway. There awaiting them was a large group of travellers who had arrived before them Jarre and his companions had to stop because the road was completely blocked by military troops.
Theyre heading south said one of the landsknechts. To the front. To Maribor and Mayenne.
Look at their banners nodded the other.
Redania said Jarre. Silver eagle on purple.
Smart boy said the landsknecht patting him on the shoulder. Yes it is Redanian soldiers that have been sent to help by Queen Hedwig. Finally the kingdoms are united again – Temeria Redania Aedirn and Kaedwen now we are allies for a common cause.
Its about time Pike said from behind them with obvious sarcasm. The landsknecht looked but said nothing.
Lets sit down Melfi said. Get some rest. The crowd of troops is not near the end it will take a while before the path is clear.
We can sit on that hill the merchant pointed. We will have a better view.
The Redanian light cavalry passed rapidly past them raising dust. Behind them marched the crossbowmen. Behind them came a column of heavy cavalry.
Those Melfi pointed to an armoured knight march under another banner. A black standard dotted with white speckles.
From what sunken hole did you climb? The landsknecht shook his head. You do not know the banner of your own king? These are the silver lilies you blockhead…
Black field covered with silver lilies Jarre said who wanted to show that he definitely climbed from no hole and hurriedly explained – The old coat of arms of the Kingdom of Temeria was a striding lion. Only the crown princes used a different standard to put on their shields the three fleur de lys. The heraldic symbolisms of the lilies are a sign of the crown prince heir to the crown and sceptre…
Fuckin know it all muttered Klaproth.
Shut your mug pig heads warned the landsknecht. And you my boy keep going. This interests me.
When prince Goidemar son of old King Gardik went to fight Falkas evil insurgents the army he brought fought under the coat of arms of the lilies making a decisive advantage. And when Goidemar inherited the throne from his father in memory of those victories and the miraculous salvation of his wife and children from enemy hands he instituted the coat of arms of three lilies on a black field for his kingdom. And then King Cedric changed the official flag by special decree so now it is a field strewn with silver lilies. And this is Temerias crest today. Which you can visually verify without difficulty since on the road move Temerian spearmen.
You explained that very well young sir praised the merchant.
Not I said Jarre but Jan of Attre a scholar of heraldry.
And obviously you are as well versed.
Fucking great then said Pike in a low voice that he is being recruited by the banner of the silver lilies for the king of Temeria.
Suddenly they heard singing. Deep threatening like an approaching thunder storm.
Following in the tracks left by the Temerians came another army in close formation. A grey almost colourless cavalry over which waved no flags or banners. At the front of the column carried on a pole was a horizontal staff decorated with horses tails from which three human skulls hung.
The Free Company the landsknecht pointed at the riders. Condottiere. An army of mercenaries.
Even the untrained eye can see that they are seasoned Melfi sighed. I would serve with them. They ride in formation as if on parade…
The Free Company repeated the landsknecht. Behold beardless yokels those are true soldiers. The same condottieri was present at the battle of Mayenne- Adam Pangratt Lorenzo Molla Frontino and Julia Abatemarco where they decided to attack and broke the siege and liberated them from Nilfgaards strength.
In combat they are unyielding as solid rock added the other. War is a craft for them and they provide their service for money as you can easily deduce by their songs.
The company approached at a walk their singing thundering above their heads but with a strangely discordant note.
Never the sceptre nor throne shall we serve
Never with monarchs alliance we make
We with the coin so like the sun shimmering
Leap to obey!
Nothing for us your soldiers fealties
Nor bow to your banners nor kiss hands
We for these coin so like the sun golden
Give our allegiance!
I would like to serve with them Melfi breathed again. To fight at their side. Capturing fortune and fame.
Do my eyes deceive me? Okultich furrowed his brow. Who rides at the head of the crowd? A female? Are these mercenaries fighting under the command of women?
She is not just any woman growled the landsknecht. It is Julia Abatemarco who they call Pretty Kitty. All of her enemies tremble before her. This company comprises barely a thousand men but before the gates of Mayenne they cut down three thousand Black Ones and elves.
I heard Pike said in a humble yet disgustingly vitriolic tone that famous victory was for nothing that the gold coins used for their pay was wasted unnecessarily. Nilfgaard recovered and again inflicted on our people a good lesson. They besieged Mayenne again. Maybe even took it. Maybe they are stretching their strength to the north. Maybe they - Nilfgaard bought these well-paid mercenaries. Maybe…
Maybe interrupted the landsknecht coldly you want me to smash your lying mouth bastard! And yet youre lucky because barking against ones own army is punishable by hanging. So hold your tongue before I run out of patience!
Oooh! The burly Klaproth said opening his mouth widely. Oh look at you! Dwarfs are more fun!
On the road under the deafening din of drums the blaring of bagpipes and the shrill whistle of fifes marched a formation of infantry armed with halberds battle-axes and spiked flails. Clad in pointed helmets leather and chain shirts were soldiers far smaller than usual.
Dwarves of the mountains said the landsknecht. Some of the regiments of the Mahakam Volunteer Army.
I thought said Okultich the dwarves fought against us. That these filthy tadpoles betrayed us to the Black Ones…
You thought? The landsknecht looked at him with pity. I wonder what with? If you swallowed a cockroach in you soup dolt you would have more intellect in your gut than in your head. Those who march there are one of the dwarven regiments of infantry sent to aid us by Brouver Hoog Governor of Mahakam. They have already entered combat suffering heavy casualties during the battle of Mayenne they drove back the Black Ones.
Dwarves are brave people confirmed Melfi. I met one once at an inn in Ellander during the celebration of Saovine and he gave me such a slap in the ear that I had a ringing in them until the feast of Yule.
The regiment of dwarves is the last column the landsknecht shaded his eyes with his hand. End of the parade. The road will be free soon. Lets get moving it is almost noon.
So many people are moving arms to the south nodded the merchant. There will be a great war a great misfortune. People will perish by fire and sword by the thousands. Did you gentlemen see the comet in the firmament night after night dragging a red tail behind it? When a comet has a pale tail it announces disease and epidemics plague cholera and leprosy a comet with a bluish tail portents disaster floods cloudbursts or prolonged rain. A red colour indicates that it is a comet of fire and blood and iron that are born of fire. Severe disasters will fall on people death and bloodshed. What is said in the old prophecy – corpses will cover the earth hear the howl of the wolves and those who miraculously survive will cry with happiness when they find traces of another living person… Woe to us!
Why us? The landsknecht interrupted coldly. The comet is flying high certainly it can be seen from Nilfgaard. And the Ina valley where Menno Coehoorn camps. If it can be seen by the Black Ones why not believe that it portends disaster and misfortune for them and not us.
Right! Agreed the second landsknecht. Woe to the Black Ones!
You gentlemen are exceedingly clever.
Absolutely.
They left the woods and went into meadows and pastures surrounding Vizima. Here grazed herds of horses used for riding and towing. Now in March the grass in the meadow was scarce but in the meadow stood wagons filled with hay.
I cannot believe my eyes Okultich licked his lips. Herds of horses and no one watching them! Just choose one and…
Shut up growled Pike from between his teeth smiling at the mercenaries This one gentlemen is dying to serve in the cavalry. He enjoys looking at horses.
Serve in the cavalry? The landsknecht spluttered. Have no illusions of riding on horseback. Such as you would be useless unless you were cleaning the stables or moving manure with a bucket and wheelbarrow!
They continued on and soon arrived at the dock that ran along the ponds and channels.
And suddenly above the tops of the alder they spotted the red-tiled towers of Vizima castle which stood by the river.
Were almost there said the merchant. Can you smell it?
Pu-ugh! Melfi cried. What a stink! What is it?
Probably the soldiers who have died waiting for the king to pay them muttered Pike form behind them but so the landsknechts could not hear.
A wonder your snout doesnt break huh? Laughed one of them. We are approaching the camp where during the winter thousands of troops camped. An army has to eat… and shit too. So it was established by nature and nothing that can be remedied! And all that shit has to go somewhere. Like in those pits over there where they go and cover it with soil. In winter it remains frozen and you can withstand it a bit but come spring… Pah!
Do you hear that buzz? The second landsknecht sniffed. There are clouds of flies and in the spring it will be an unheard of thing. Cover your face as best you can because these flies go rampaging through the mouth and eyes. Lets pick up the pace the faster the better.
They left the trenches behind but failed to lose the smell. On the contrary Jarre would have given his head the closer to the city the worse the smell got. And much more diverse. The smell surrounded the city stank of military camps and tents. It smelled of hospitals. I stank of crowded and busy boroughs squares and streets the walls above the city stank.
Luckily the nostrils soon grew accustomed to it and could not tell the difference between either dung or carrion or whether it was cat urine or the next inn.
Flies were everywhere. Buzzing annoyingly like experienced soldiers crawling into mouths noses eyes and ears. The insects could not be driven off and it was easier to crush them on their faces.
As they left the darkness of the city gate Jarres eye fell upon a huge poster of a painted knight who pointed his finger at him. The inscription beneath the knight in capital letters read – WHAT ABOUT YOU? HAVE YOU ENLISTED?
Yes muttered the landsknecht. Unfortunately.
There were many similar signs hung on almost every available wall. Most were of the knight pointing his finger often also with a pathetic looking mother with billowing grey hair standing in the background of burning villages and babies impaled on Nilfgaardian stakes. Another popular motif was pictures of elves with bloody knives in their teeth dripping blood.
Jarre turned around and suddenly realised they were alone – the landsknecht the merchant and himself. Pike Okultich Klaproth Melfi and the rural recruits were gone without a trace.
Well well the landsknecht confirmed his conjectures looking around inquisitively. As I expected your comrades took off at the first opportunity rascals gave us the slip at the first corner. But you know what Ill tell you boy? Be glad that your paths diverged. And wish that you had never met.
Im sorry for Melfi Jarre murmured. He is not a bad person.
Each person chooses his own destiny. Come with us. We will show you were to recruit.
They entered a square with a stone platform in the centre on it stood a pillory.
Around the pillory townspeople and soldiers thronged. The condemned had mud and shit flung at their faces they were spitting spluttering screaming and crying. The crowd laughed.
Wow! Cried the landsknecht. Look who is locked in the stocks! Its Fuson! I wonder why he is in there?
For farming a fat burgher in wolf fur and a felt hat hastened to explain.
For what?
For farming the fat man repeated with emphasis. For planting.
Ha! So you spoke clearly forgive me the landsknecht laughed. Thats nonsense I have known Fuson for many years. He is a shoemaker the son of a shoemaker and grandson of a shoemaker. In his life it has never occurred to him to plough or sow or reap. Where did you come to such a towering pile of shit sir?
The magistrate read the judgement the man said indignantly. It is said the criminal will stay in the pillory until tomorrow morning for on the command of Nilfgaard he has sown some strange exotic herb. Probably poisonous… Wait I remember… Oh! Defetyzm!
Yes yes! Cried the merchant. I heard talk of it. The Nilfgaardian spies and the elves are spreading epidemics poisoning wells springs and streams with various poisons such as hemlock typhoid and defetyzm.
Thats right said the fat man in the felt cap. Yesterday in the square they hanged two elves. Surely for such poisonings.
In this street the landsknecht pointed is an inn with a draft board in the office. Good luck kid and perhaps the gods with let us meet in better times. Farewell and you Mister merchant.
The merchant cleared his throat.
Kind gentlemen said the merchant rummaging through little chests and trunks on his cart for your help… As a sign of gratitude…
Do not trouble yourself good man the landsknecht said with a smile. Lets not speak of it.
How about a magic ointment against arrows? The old man rummaged through a trunk. Or an effective and versatile tool for the treatment of asthma gout paralysis and to remove dandruff? Or a balm for bee stings or if you have been bitten by a rabid dog vipers or a vampire? Or a talisman against the evil eye?
And you do not have anything the second landsknecht said seriously for the effects of bad food?
I have! Cried the merchant. Here it is the most effective antidote developed from magical roots spices and herbs. Three drops will suffice after each meal. Please take it noble lords.
Thank you. Farewell sir. You too boy.
Honest and decent gentlemen said the merchant when both the landsknechts disappeared into the crowd. Its not every day you find people like that. Nor like you young sir! What can I give you then? An amulet against lightning? A bezoar? Turtle
pebbles effective against spells of charming? Aha! I even have a hanged mans tooth and a piece of devil shit…
Jarre tore his gaze away from a group of people fiercely washing paint from the wall of a house which read – DOWN WITH THE FUCKING WAR!
No need he said. It is time for me…
Ha! The merchant shouted and pulled out a brass medallion in the shape of a heart. This is the right thing for a young man. It is truly unique I have only one such amulet. It is a magic charm. It makes the one who carries it never forget his love even if time and many miles separate them. Look inside is a piece of papyrus with magical red ink that I have you just write the name of the loved one and she will never forget or betray you. What do you think?
Hmmm… blushed Jarre. I dont know…
What name the merchant dipped a quill into his magic ink should I write?
Ciri. I mean Cirilla.
Done. Here you go.
Jarre! Bloody hell! What are you doing here?
Jarre turned impulsively. Id hoped he thought that I would leave my past behind that everything would be all new and I seem to constantly bump into old acquaintances.
Dennis Cranmer!
A dwarf dressed in a heavy fur coat steel armour arm guards and a fox-skin hat with a tail cast a penetrating look at the boy then the merchant then again at the boy.
What are you doing here Jarre? He asked sternly his brows beard and moustache bristling.
For a moment the boy thought to lie and get the good-hearted merchant to confirm it. He immediately gave up this idea. Dennis Cranmer who had once served in the guard in the Principality of Ellander enjoyed the reputation of being a dwarf who was difficult to deceive. And he knew it was not worth the try.
Im going to enlist in the army.
He knew what the next question would be.
Do you have permission from Nenneke?
He did not respond.
You ran away Dennis Cranmer stroked his beard. You fled from the temple. And Nenneke and the priestesses are probably pulling out their hair…
I left a letter grumbled Jarre. Mister Cranmer I could not… I had to… One cannot sit idly by while the enemy is on his border… in a time of threat to ones homeland… and… Ciri… Mother Nenneke banned me. She sent three quarters of the sanctuaries girls to the army but she did not want me to go. But I had to…
So you ran away the dwarf wrinkled his brow. By a thousand sacramental demons! I should tie you to a stick and send you back to Ellander. I should order you locked up in a cave until the priestesses come and pick you up! I should…
He snorted angrily.
When was the last time you ate something Jarre? How long since your throat had a hot meal?
Hot meal? Three… No four days ago.
Come with me.
Eat slower son Zoltan Chivay one of Dennis Cranmers comrades rebuked him. Not so fast its not healthy to swallow without chewing properly. Where are you going in a hurry? Believe me; no one is going to take the pot away.
Jarre was not so sure. In the main hall of the Hairy Bear inn a duel of fisticuffs was being held. Two stubby dwarves as wide as stoves were banging fists together so loud that the noise rang over the top of the clamour and cheers from the companions of the regiment. The plank floor creaked dishes fell from shelves and blood from broken noses sprayed the surrounding area like rain. Jarre was afraid that one of the opponents would soon roll over the table and throw the wooden platter with pork cooked peas and earthenware pints to the floor. He swallowed a chunk of meat without swallowing because the last few days had taught him that anything could befall you.
I dont understand Dennis said another dwarf at the table called Sheldon Skaggs without paying attention to the fact that one of the fighters after a hard blow almost rolled over his back. If the boy is a priest how is he going to enlist? The blood of priests should not be spilled.
He was schooled at the temple hes not a priest.
Damn I can never understand those human superstitions. But it is not proper to mock other people beliefs… However since this young man was only brought up in the temple there is nothing against his shedding blood. Especially Nilfgaards. What do you say boy?
Let him to eat in peace Sheldon.
I will answer… Jarre took a bite of pork with a spoonful of peas. I think the spilling of blood in a righteous war is permissible and justified. Thats why I want to enlist. The motherland is calling.
You can see for yourself Sheldon Skaggs looked at his companions how much truth there is in the assertion that humans are a race closely akin to our own and that we derive from the same root both them and us. The best proof is sitting in front of us and eating peas. In other words the same stupid enthusiasm we see in young dwarves.
Especially after Mayenne said Zoltan Chivay calmly. After winning a battle voluntary enlistment always rises. The momentum will cease as soon as the news that Menno Coehoorn is heading up the Ina River leaving land and going by water.
I only wish that the rush was the other way muttered Cranmer. I do not have confidence in the volunteers. It is interesting that every second deserter is a volunteer.
How can you… Jarre almost choked. How can you suggest something like that sir… I volunteer from patriotic motives… For the motherland…
One of the dwarves had fallen during the fistfight the boy thought that he had shaken the foundations of the building because the dust from the cracks in the floor planks rose as high as a raised arm. However this time he stayed down rather than jumping back up and pouncing on his opponent he lay on the floor feebly moving his limbs so he looked more like a giant beetle on his back.
Dennis Cranmer stood up.
The issue is resolved he announced in a thundering voice looking around the taproom. The post of company commander vacant after the heroic death of Elkana Foster killed in the field of honour during the battle of Mayenne will be occupied by… What is your name son I have forgotten?
Blasco Grant! The winner of the match spat a tooth on the floor.
Blasco Grant is the new commander. Does anyone have any objection to his promotion? There are none? All right. Innkeeper! Beer!
What were we talking about?
Of a just war Zoltan Chivay began to count on his fingers. Of the volunteers. Of the deserters…
Oh that! Dennis interrupted him. I knew I wanted to explain something concerning volunteers deserters and traitors. I remember the late volunteer army for the Marshal of Cintra Vissegerd. The motherfuckers it turns out have not even changed their banner. I know this from the Condottieri of the Free Company from Julia Pretty Kitty. At Mayenne they encountered the Cintrans. Those sons of bitches were fighting alongside Nilfgaard under the banner of the golden lion…
Called on by their motherland Skaggs said gloomily. And the future Empress Cirilla.
Shh said Dennis.
Right said the fourth dwarf Yarpen Zigrin who had been silent up until now. Hush! And quieter than silence. But not because of fear of spies but because you cannot talk about things you have no fucking idea about.
And you Zigrin Skaggs puffed out his beard. You know something about this?
Aye I know. I tell you one thing – nobody not even Emhyr var Emreis nor those treacherous sorcerers from Thanedd not even the devil himself could force that girl to do anything. They did not manage to break her. I know it. Because I know her. Its a hoax this whole marriage to Emhyr. A deception that has led many fools astray… Also Ill tell you that girls destiny is quite different.
You talk muttered Skaggs as if you really know her Zigrin.
Leave him! Zoltan suddenly scolded. Her fate is different. I think so to. I have my reasons for it.
Bah! Sheldon Skaggs replied shaking his hands. Why spend saliva in vain. Cirilla Emhyr destiny… They are distant issues. Our concern is Menno Coehoorn the Field Marshal of the Centre Army Group.
Well sighed Zoltan Chivay. It seems to me that we are not going to escape a battle. Perhaps the biggest in known history.
Much will be decided muttered Dennis Cranmer. A lot will end.
Everything… Jarre belched and covered his mouth with his hands embarrassed. Everything ends.
The dwarves watched him for a moment silent.
I dont think I fully understand you Zoltan finally said. Could you explain what you mean?
At the royal council in Ellander I heard… stammered Jarre. There was talk about a great victory in this war; it was so important that… That this war put an end to all wars.
Sheldon Skaggs snorted spitting beer onto his beer. Zoltan Chivay roared with laughter.
What do you think gentlemen?
Now it was Dennis Cranmers turn to burst out laughing. Yarpen Zigrin retained his seriousness. He studied the young man attentively and seemed concerned.
Son he said very seriously. Look. There sitting at the counter is Evangelina Parr. She is admittedly substantial. Indeed even great. But despite her actions no one whore can put an end to all whores.
When they left the inn Dennis Cranmer took the young man aside.
I have to praise you Jarre he said. Do you know why?
No.
Do not pretend. Before me you do not. It is worthy of praise that you did not blink an eye when they mentioned Ciri. Do not look as if you dont know what I mean. I know a few things that were happening at Nennekes temple. I also heard the name that you had entered in the heart medallion.
The dwarf pretended not to notice the blush that suffused the boys face.
Keep it up Jarre. And not only about Ciri… What are you looking at?
On the wall of a granary visible at the entrance to an alley stood a blurred painting written in lime which read – MAKE LOVE NOT WAR.
Just below with significantly smaller letters someone had scrawled the following message – MAKE SHIT EVERY MORNING.
Look the other way stupid Dennis Cranmer barked. Just seeing such inscriptions can get you in trouble. Do not say no out of place or they tie you to a post and whip you bloody. Here the trials are very fast! Incredibly fast!
I saw Jarre whispered a shoemaker in the pillory. He allegedly sowed defetyzm.
The sowing the dwarf said seriously pulling the boys sleeve probably consisted of the fact that the father was driving his son to the military and he cried and shouted about patriotism. For the more serious sowing there is a different punishment. Come on Ill show you.
They entered a small square. Jarre had to pull back and cover his nose and mouth with his sleeve. On a huge gallows hung several bodies. Some from their appearance and smell had been hanging there for some time.
That one said Dennis while swatting away flies wrote silly phrases on the walls. He said that war is a thing of lords and peasant recruits and that Nilfgaard were not their enemies. That one was drunk and told the following anecdote – What is a spear? The weapon nobles stick a poor man at each end. And there at the end you see the old woman? She was the mistress of a military brothel and had decorated a sign with this – Fuck today warrior! Because tomorrow you may not be able to.
And just for that…
One of the girls it was revealed later also had gonorrhoea. And that came within the paragraph of conspiracy and sabotage of combat capabilities.
I understand Mister Cranmer Jarre took a stance that he considered military. But do not worry about me; I am not a defeatist…
You do not understand shit and do not interrupt me I have not finished. The last one that was hanged who stinks already their only crime was the during a talk with an undercover informer responded saying – You are correct my friend it is not. Now you can tell me you understand.
I understand the boy looked around cautiously. Ill be careful. But… Mister Cranmer… What is really happening?
The dwarf also glanced around carefully.
The truth he replied in a whisper is that the strength of Field Marshal Menno Coehoorns Centre Army Group is a hundred thousand men. If there was no rebellion in Verden he would be here. The truth is that neither of our combined armies have enough power to stop Coehoorn. At least not before the strategic line of the Pontar.
The river is north of us whispered Jarre.
Well you wanted to hear the truth. But remember to keep a lock on your mouth.
Ill be careful. And once I enlist? I have to be careful around the soldiers? In case there is a spy among them?
In a combat regiment? Near the front line? On no! Spies are too busy far from the front because they are afraid of ending up there themselves. Also if every soldier who protested complained or cursed was hanged there would be no one to fight this war. But your mouth Jarre as in the case of Ciri keep it closed. Now come with me I will escort you to the Commission office.
Mister Cranmer Jarre looked with hope at the dwarf. Will you speak for me there?
You foolish dandy! This is the Army! If I recommend you and protect you it is like having milksop embroidered on your back in gold thread. No one will leave you alone in your unit lad.
What about you… Jarre asked. Does your unit…
Do not even think about it.
Because there is only room for dwarves it that it? Said the boy bitterly. Not for me?
Right.
Not for you thought Dennis Cranmer. Not for you Jarre. Im too obliged to Mother Nenneke. Therefore I would like you to return from the war. The Mahakam Volunteer Army is composed of dwarves volunteers from inferior races and foreigners they will always be sent into the worst places the most dangerous sections of the battle. There is no return. To the places when humans would not be sent.
So what can be arranged Jarre frowned to get into a good unit?
And that according to you is special for you to seek?
Jarre turned hearing singing coming on like a wave in the surf rising as rapidly as an approaching thunder storm. The singing was loud and strong and hard as steel. He had heard such singing before.
From the street leading away from the castle in three columns marched the Condottieri regiment. At their head with the standard covered with horses and skulls was a man with an aquiline nose and hair in a braid that fell onto his armour.
Adam Adieu Pangratt murmured Dennis Cranmer.
The condottieris singing thundered down the street.
In counterpoint was the ringing of horseshoes on pavement which filled the street and soared up to the tops of the houses and far up into the blue sky over the city.
For we do not mourn for lovers or wives
When we the earth redden with blood
For the coin like the sun fills us with light
For this we fight!
Which unit? Jarre said unable to look away from the cavalry. Hopefully one like this! In one that would be worthwhile…
Each one has its own anthem the dwarf broke the silence. But every soldier must pour out his own blood. Either someone will cry for him or not. In war son those who sing and march are equal the formations are equal. And then in battle everyone must face their own destiny. Whether in the Free Company with Adieu Pangratt or in the infantry or in the camps… In shiny armour with a proud plume or in a lousy fur coat. With a lush stallion or with a battered shield… each must face his destiny. Well here we are at the Commission office can you see the sign above the entrance? Make your way over there if you are still thinking of being a soldier. Good luck Jarre. Ill see you when this is over.
The dwarfs eyes followed the boy until he disappeared through the door to the inn occupied by the recruitment box.
Or maybe I will not see you he added quietly. Who knows what is written. What is chosen.
Can you ride? Shoot a bow or crossbow?
No Commissioner. But I can control font and calligraphy. I know ancient runes… I know Elder Tongue…
Are you skilled with the sword? Using a spear?
Ive read the history of wars. Writings by Marshal Pelligram. And Roderick de Novembre…
Can you at least cook?
Not well… But I can count…
The recruiter rolled his eyes and waved his hand.
More intellects. How many more will we get? Write him some papers for the PFI. You will serve in the PFI young man. Take the papers to the south end of town to the Maribor gate next to the lake.
But…
You should have no problems with it. Next!
Hey Jarre! Wait!
Melfi?
It sure is said the journeyman cooper staggering and leaning against a wall. Brrr Im sick…
What is it?
What do I know? Heh heh! Nothing! We celebrated a bit. We drank to the defeat of the Nilfgaardians. Oh Jarre Im glad to see you. I thought we had lost you somewhere… My friend…
Jarre stepped back like someone had slapped him. The cooper not only reeked of dirty beer and brandy but also onions garlic and the devil knew what else. It was unbearable.
Where did they go he asked mockingly your great comrades?
Let the devil take them Melfi grinned. You know why I came Jarre? Because that Pike was not a good person.
Bravo. Good for you.
So you see Melfi continued not noticing Jarres taunt. I was not easy to fool. Do you know why he came to Vizima? Do you think he wanted to join the army? Youd be wrong! You would not believe what he is up to.
Id believe it.
He needed horses and uniforms Melfi concluded triumphantly. He wanted to steal them here because he had an idea of going on bandit raids dressed as a soldier.
Hell end up on the gallows.
I should say so said the Cooper leaning against the wall unbuttoning his pants. Im sorry for Ograbek and Milton the stupid straw heads let themselves be deceived by Pike and theyll end up on the gallows as well. Do you know about yours Jarre?
Huh?
Where are you assigned? Melfi asked while urinating on the whitewashed wall. Ive been sent to the Maribor gate. On the south side of town. Where are you going to?
Also there.
Ha! The Cooper jumped a few times then buttoned his pants. We will fight together?
I think not Jarre said with an air of superiority. I have been assigned to the unit according to my qualifications. The FPI.
Of course Melfi hiccupped and burped his hideous drunken breath again. Youre a scholar! You would certainly have an important position. But what can you do? Meanwhile we can continue to walk for a time together. After all we have to go the same way to the south side of the city.
It seems so.
Shall we?
Lets go.
I dont think this is it said Jarre looking at the tents surrounding a courtyard where the dust stirred around the feet of a company practising manoeuvres with long sticks on their shoulders. Each person the young man realised had a bundle of hay bound to their right leg and a bundle of straw on their left.
I think we took a wrong turn Melfi.
Straw! Hay! They could hear the roars from the courtyard from a sergeant who was addressing the ragged mob. Straw! Hay! Pick up the pace or Ill whore your mother!
There is a flag over the tent Melfi said. See for yourself Jarre. These are the same lilies you told us about on the road. There is a flag? Yes. There is a camp? Yes. This indicates we are in the right place.
Maybe for you. But certainly not for me.
Look there is someone over by the fence. Lets go ask them.
Then everything started to happen quickly.
New recruits? Yelled the sergeant. Give me your papers! Why the hell are you standing there next to each other! March! Left I said not right! Trot trot! Halt fuck and about-face! Listen and remember! Go to the Master of Supplies! Collect your weapons! Chain shirt tabard pike helmet and dagger! Then back here for drills! Be ready at sunset! Break ranks! Go!
Wait Jarre said looking insecure Because I think I have another assignment…
WHAT?
Excuse me Officer Jarre blushed. I just want to prevent any mistake… The Commissioner clearly… Explicitly talked about an allocation to the PFI so I…
Youre home boy. Snorted the sergeant disarmed a bit by being called officer. This is your assignment. Welcome to the Poor Fucking Infantry.
Why wondered Rocco Hildebrandt do we still have to pay you gentlemen soldiers? We have already paid all the taxes on time.
Do you hear this shrimp Pike said grinning to his cronies on stolen horses. He said he already paid. And they think that that was everything. Its like the turkey who was pondering Sunday. But had his head cut off on Saturday!
Okultich Klaproth Milton and Ograbek broke out in laughter. The joke was after all a front. And the fun was about to start.
Rocco saw the disgusting sticky eyes of the ravagers and looked around. On the threshold of the cottage was Incarvilia Hildebrandt his wife and his two daughters Aloe and Yasmin.
Pike and his company looked at the halfling women smiling lasciviously. Yes without a doubt this promised to be great fun.
From out of a hedge on the other side of the road approached Hildebrandts niece Impatientia Vanderbeck affectionately known as Impi. She was a truly beautiful girl. The bandits smiles became even more disgusting.
Come Pike urged the halfling. Bring out food for us and the horses and take it to the barn. We do not want to be stuck here after dark. We want to visit the neighbouring villages today.
Why do we have to pay and give you what is ours? Rocco Hildebrandts voice trembled slightly but still remained stubborn and tenacious. You say it is for the army for our defence. And who will protect us from hunger? We have already paid for the winter quarters and the contribution to the army and the tax for each person and assessment for our lands and rates and a tax on wagons and signposts and the devil knows what else! And as if this was not enough four from our settlement among them my own son have been enlisted into the army. A relative of mine Milo Vanderbeck known as Rusty is a field surgeon in the army and an important person. We have fulfilled their obligations. What are we to pay again? And why?
Pike continually watched the wife of the halfling Incarvilia Hildebrandt of Biberveldt. And the plump daughters Aloe and Yasmin. Also the cute Impi Vanderbeck who looked like a doll in a green dress. At Sam Hofmeier and his grandfather and old man Holofernes. The grandmother Petunia pecking viciously at her garden bed with a hoe. At the other halflings in the village mainly women and youths looking anxiously from behind houses and fences.
You ask why? Pike hissed leading forward in his saddle looking into the eyes of the frightened halfling. Ill tell you why. Because you are mangy halfling a runt a stranger. You are inhuman and it is the will of the gods that you are beaten and killed. Because I cannot wait to see this rat hole burn and see you and your bitch scurry about. Because we are five humans and you are a handful of cowards. Now do you know why?
Now I know Rocco Hildebrandt said slowly. Get away from here big people. Go far away. We will not give you anything.
Pike sat up and reached for the sword hanging on his saddle.
Strike! He shouted. Kill them.
With a movement faster than the eye could follow Rocco Hildebrandt bent down to his wheelbarrow took out a crossbow hidden under some mats and shot his attacker with a bolt right into his open mouth. Incarvilia Hildebrandt born a Biberveldt whipped her hands through the air and threw a sickle which neatly cut through Miltons larynx. The country boy a son of a servant began to vomit blood and flipped over the back of his horse legs waving.
Ograbek emitting a scream and fell face down under the hooves of his horse in his belly up to the wooden handle was stuck grandfather Holofernes knife. The burly Klaproth started to club the old man but flew out of his saddle squealing terribly hit straight in the eye with a skewer flung by Impatientia Vanderbeck. Okultich wheeled his horse and tried to flee but grandmother Petunia jumped up and sliced her hoe into his thigh. Okultich roared and fell his foot still stuck in the stirrup his frightened horse dragged him through hedges and over sharp sticks. The dragged robber roared and howled and after him raced grandmother Petunia with her hoe and Impatientia with a crooked knife for grafting trees. Old man Holofernes blew his nose loudly through his fingers.
The whole episode – from Pike screaming to grandfather Holofernes blowing his nose – took about as long as it would take to say – Halflings are extremely fast and agile and can flawless hurl missiles of all kinds.
Rocco sat on the steps of the cottage. Beside him sat his wife Incarvilia. Their daughters went to help Sam Hofmeier strip the slain and wounded.
Impatientia came back with her green dress pulled back to the elbows. Grandmother Petunia also came back she walked slowly panting and groaning and leaning on her hoe.
Oh our grandmother is getting older and aging Rocco thought.
Where should we bury the robbers Mister Rocco? Asked Sam Hofmeier.
Rocco Hildebrandt took his wife in his arms and looked at the sky.
In the birch grove he said along with the ones who have come before them.
The sensational adventures of Mister Malcolm Guthrie of Braemore have achieved great notoriety in the pages of the largest newspapers even the London Daily Mail has dedicate a few lines in the Bizarre section. Since we know that only a small number of our subscribers read press releases issued south of Tweed we will recall the said event. On March 10th this year Mister Malcolm Guthrie went with a fishing rod to Loch Glascarnoch.
There Mister Guthrie saw out of the mist and nothingness (sic) from the lake appeared a girl with a scar on her face (sic) riding a black mare (sic) accompanied by a white unicorn (sic).
The girl approached the stunned Mister Guthrie and spoke to him in a language that Mister Guthrie described as and I quote French I think or a dialect of another continent.
However as Mister Guthrie does not speak French or any other dialect from anther continent he could not talk to the girl. The girl and the unicorn disappeared to quote Mister Guthrie again Like a golden dream.
Editor Review: The dream of Mister Guthrie was a golden colour like the colour of single malt whiskey which we learned from a reliable source that he used to drink regularly and which fully explains the visions of white unicorns white mice and monsters from Scottish lakes. But the main question we want to ask Mister Guthrie is - What were you doing with a fishing rod on the shores of Lock Glascarnoch four days after the ban on fishing?
Inverness Weekly March 18 1906
CHAPTER SEVEN
The wind picked up clouds rushed from the west and gradually enveloped the constellations. The Dragon vanished the Lady Winter and then the Seven Goats. Finally the Eye disappeared the constellation that shone the brightest.
The dome of the sky gleamed along the horizon briefly with lightning. It was joined by a dull thunder clap. The storm grew more violent throwing dust and dry leaves into her eyes.
The unicorn whinnied and sent another mental signal.
We must not waste time. Our only hope is a quick getaway. At the right place and the right time. Hurry Star Eyes.
I am the Lady of the Worlds. I am of the Elder Blood. I am from the blood of Lara Dorren the daughter of Shiadhal.
Ihuarraquax whinnied again urging her to hurry. Kelpie whinnied as well. Ciri pulled on a pair of gloves.
Im ready she said.
A buzz sounded in her ears. A glow. And then darkness.
The curses of the Fisher King while he pulled and twisted on a rope on his boat trying to free it from the tangled web at the bottom of the lake broke the silence of the afternoon. The oars which were loose rattled softly. Nimue coughed impatiently and Condwiramurs turned leaving the window and leaned back over the prints. There was one print that drew the eye more than the other. A girl with ruffled hair sitting on a prancing horse. Next to her was a white unicorn.
Perhaps for this part of the legend mused the adept the historians had no objection and just recognised it as a fictional story or a metaphor. But the artists and painters took a liking to this episode. Look here is a picture with Ciri with a unicorn. Here is Ciri with a unicorn on a cliff above the sea here on a narcotic induced landscape and here under two moons.
Nimue was silent.
In short Condwiramurs threw the prints onto the table Ciri and the unicorn from all sides. Ciri and the unicorn in the labyrinth of worlds Ciri and the unicorn in the abyss of time…
Ciri and the unicorn interrupted Nimue looking out the window at the lake to the boat with the Fisher King. Ciri and the unicorn appearing out of nothingness like ghosts and hanging over a lake a lake that unites time and places like a bridge all the time different and yet always the same?
How?
Phantoms Nimue said not looking at her. Visitors from other dimensions other levels other places other times. Visions that transform ones life. Transforms your life and your destiny… Without knowing. For them it is… just another place. The wrong place wrong time. Who knows how many times…
Nimue Condwiramurs interrupted her with a forced laugh. You recall that Im the dreamer here. And you all of a sudden begin to divine. You were talking like you saw it… in a dream.
The Fisher King judging from the intensity of his voice and curses failed to untangle the rope and it broke. Nimue was silent looking at the pictures. Ciri and the Unicorn.
It is true she said at last I have seen this in my dreams. I have seen it in my dreams many times. And once while awake.
The journey from Czluchow to Malbork may under some circumstances take up to five days. And because Grand Master Winrich von Kniprodes letter had to reach the addressee no later than the day of Pentecost Heinrich von Schwelborn the knight was not slow and left the day after the Sunday of Exaudi Domine to be able to travel safely and without any risk of delay. Slowly but steadily. The knights approach was greatly enjoyed by his company six crossbowmen commanded by Hasso Planck the son of a baker from Cologne. The crossbowmen and Planck were more accustomed to these knights cursing shouting and ordering them to ride their horses to death to arrive on time and then casting all the blame on their poor servants for any delays.
It was cold although it was cloudy. From time to time it drizzled and fog rippled through the ravines. The hills covered in dense vegetation reminded the knight Heinrich of his native Thuringia. The crossbowmen sang at the rear the ballad of Walther von Vogelwiede and Hasso Planck dozed in the saddle.
If you love a good woman
It is the cure to all iniquity…
The travel proceeded peacefully and who knows maybe the end would have been peaceful if not for the fact that around noon the knight Hienrich saw at the bottom of the road a shimmering lake. And since the next day was Friday and custom decreed that they fast from red meat the knight ordered them to enter the water and look for fish.
The lake was large it even had an island. No one knew what its name was but it was surely called Sacred. In this pagan country every second lake was called Sacred.
The hooves of the horses crushed shells on the shore. The fog hung over the lake and the wilderness. There were no signs of boats or nets not a soul. We will have to look elsewhere Heinrich von Schwelborn thought. And if not then so be it. We will eat what we have in our saddlebags even the jerky and well confess to chaplain Malbork who can grant us absolution for our sins.
He was about to give the order when in his head under his helmet started a buzz. Hasso Planck released a sharp cry. Von Schwelborn looked in the same direction and crossed himself.
He saw two horses – one white and the other black. In the next moment he noticed that the white horses head was domed with a twisted horn that rose from its forehead. He also realised that the black horse actually a sable mare had a girl sitting on it with ashen hair which covered part of her face. The visions seemed not to touch either the land or the water and he had the feeling that they were part of the mist that twisted above the surface of the lake.
The black horse whinnied.
Ooops the girl with the ashen hair said quite clearly. Ire lokke ire tedd! Squaessme.
Saint Ursula Patroness… Hasso stammered pale as death. The crossbowmen froze with open mouths and made the sign of the cross in front of them.
Von Schwelborn also crossed himself and with a trembling hand drew his sword from its scabbard strapped to his saddle.
Holy Mary Mother of God! He cried. Stand with me!
Knight Heinrich did not bring shame to his ancestors that day including Dietrich von Schwelborn who valiantly fought against Damietta and was one of the few to not run away when the Saracens conjured and released a horse of black demons. Kicking his heels into his horse and remembering his ancestors Heinrich von Schwelborn charged the apparition.
By the Order and Saint George!
The white unicorn reared back and the black mare danced. The girl you could see at a glance was frightened as knight Heinrich rushed to the attack. God knows how it would have ended all of a sudden a gust of wind brought a scrap of mist from the lake and the vision vanished in a rainbow of colours like crushed stones or broken stained glass. The phantoms disappeared – the unicorn the mare and the strange girl…
The sorrel on which Heinrich von Schwelborn was mounted entered the lake with a splash stopped and shook its head and snorted chewing at the bit.
Hasso Planck mastered his reluctant horse and headed for the knight. Von Schwelborn was breathing and wheezing his eyes bulging like a fishes.
The bones of Saint Ursula Saint Korduli and all the eleven thousand virgin martyrs… Hasso Planck managed. What was it? Knight Heinrich? A miracle? A revelation?
The devils work! Von Schwelborn gasped now only pale and trembling. Black magic! Witchcraft! A damned thing pagan and demonic.
Wed better get out of here Sir. The sooner… We are not far from Pelpin let the church bells guide us…
In the same forest on a hill the knight Heinrich looked down one last time. The wind drove the fog back in places and the wrinkled surface of the lake became visible.
Over the water circled a great eagle.
Wicked pagan country Heinrich von Schwelborn muttered. Lot and lots of hard work awaits us; the law of the Teutonic Knights will finally drive the devil from here.
Horsey Ciri said reproachfully and ironically at the same time. I would not want to rush you but Im in a bit of a hurry to get to my world. My loved ones need me you know. Instead we almost fall into a lake and see a man in funny clothes then we see a band of dirty screamers with clubs and finally a madman with a cross! These are not my world or my time! Please try to get better. Please.
Ihuarraquax whinnied and nodded his horn and sent Ciri a mental idea. Ciri misunderstood. She had no time to think since the inside of her skull was again flooded by a cold clarity her ears buzzed and her body tingled.
And again the darkness engulfed her.
Nimue laughing with delight pulled the mans hand they both ran to the lake dodging among the birches and alders. On the sandy shore Nimue kicked off her sandals lifted her dress and ran barefoot into the water. The man pulled off his shoes but did not go into the water. He took off his cloak and carefully spread it on the ground.
Nimue ran to him and hugged him around the neck. She stood on tiptoe and even so the man had to bend deeply to kiss her. They did not call her Thumbelina for nothing but now since she was eighteen and was accomplished in the magical arts she only permitted her closes friends to call her that. And some men.
The man not taking his lips from Nimues slid his hand behind her neck.
Then it went quickly. They were both on the sand on his cloak. Nimues skirt was hiked up over her waist her legs wrapped around the mans hips and her nails dug into his shoulders and back. When he took her as usual he was too impatient she gritted her teeth but quickly caught up in the excitement of it. The man emitted ridiculous sounds. Over his shoulder Nimue watched slowly flying clouds of fantastic shapes.
Something dimly rang like a bell under water. Nimue heard a murmur in her ears. Magic she thought and turned her head away from the face of the man. Standing by the shore – hanging above the surface was a white unicorn. At his side was a black mare. In the saddle on the horse sat a girl…
But I know this legend the thought flashed through Nimues head. I know this story! When I was a child I heard this tale from the old wandering storyteller… The Witcheress Ciri… The scar on her cheek… The black mare Kelpie… The unicorn… The Land of the Elves…
The movement of the man who was oblivious to the events going on became more violent and he issued funnier sounds.
Ooops said the girl sitting on the black mare. Another mistake! Not here not at this time. To make matters worse I think we arrived at the completely wrong time. Sorry.
The image faded and burst exploding like painted glass into a riot of rainbow luminescence radiance and brightness then everything disappeared.
No! Nimue cried. No! Dont disappear! Dont run!
She straightened her knees and tried to break free of the man but could not – he was more powerful than her and heavier. The man groaned and grunted.
Ooooh Nime… Oooh!
Nimue screamed and sunk her teeth into his shoulder.
They lay side by side on the crumpled cloak sweaty and anxious. Nimue looked back at the lakeshore. The waves gave off an off-white foam. The reeds bent in the wind. The colourless bleak emptiness that remained after the lost legend.
Tears flowed down Nimues face.
Nimue… Is something wrong?
Yes there was… She clung to him but still looked at the lake. Dont talk. Hold me and say nothing.
The man smiled.
I know what happened he said boastfully. The earth moved right?
Nimue smiled sadly.
Not only the earth she said after a moment. Not only the earth.
A flash. Darkness. The next place.
The place was gloomy sinister and repulsive.
Ciri involuntarily hunched in her saddle. She was shaken both physically and mentally. Kelpies horseshoes rang on something flat and smooth durable and as hard as rock. After a long time gliding in oblivion where everything was soft the mare whinnied and began to pull violently to one side; smashing her hooves into the hard rock with such a staccato that Ciris teeth rang.
The second shook was from a smell. Ciri gasped ad covered her mouth and nose with her sleeve. She could feel her eyes immediately fill with tears.
Around her floated an acid corrosive dense stench it was choking and disgusting and she could not remember ever smelling anything like it. What it was – was the stench of decay cadaverous the final stench in the chain of degradation and degeneration the smell of ruin and destruction and she felt that whatever was rotting had smelt no better when it had been alive. Even at its heyday.
She bent over with her gag reflex which she could no longer suppress. Kelpie snorted and tossed her head. The unicorn who appeared beside them sat on his haunches jumped and kicked. The impact with the hard surface was answered with a loud echo.
Around them the night was dark and wrapped them in a choking haze. Ciri looked up to get their bearings by the stars but above her head was nothing but a black vault just above the horizon was illuminated by the red glare of distant fires.
Ooops she said when she grinned she felt a sticky acidic moisture on her lips Brrrr. Wrong place wrong time. In the literal sense!
The unicorn snorted and shook his head his horn moved in a short arc.
The floor grating under Kelpies hooves was rock but strange and unnatural even which gave off an intense smell of burning ash and dirt. It took a while before Ciri realised the maybe it was a road. She was getting the most agonizing shock with each step therefore she turned Kelpie towards the verge lined with something that was perhaps once trees but now only looked like mutilated skeletons from which hung tattered shreds which reminded her of the remnants of rotten shrouds.
The unicorn warned her with a whinny and a mental signal. But it was too late.
The dead trees began to slope down and ended at a deep escarpment. Ciri screamed and kicked her heels into the mares sides. Kelpies strained muscles were bunching up and her hooves were crushing what was covering – or basically consisted of the slope – garbage mostly some weird empty containers. These containers did not crumple under the horseshoes but broke as if disgustingly soft like big fish bladders. Each of them gurgled softly and emitted a smell that nearly knocked Ciri out of the saddle. Kelpie neighing furiously stomped up the dump towards the road. Ciri choking from the stench clung to the mares neck.
The made it. The hardness of the unpleasant road was greeted with an odd mixture of joy and relief.
Ciri was still shaking as she looked down the hill. The escarpment ended at a black lake at the bottom. Its surface was glossy and motionless as if there was no water but was filled with pitch. Behind the lake past mounds of ash and slag heaps the sky glowed with distant fires.
Above the horizon ruddy columns of smoke were rising.
The unicorn snorted. Ciri wanted to rub her watery eyes on her sleeve but found that the entire sleeve was covered with dust. A layer of dust also covered her thighs saddle and Kelpies neck and mane. The smell was unbearable.
How disgusting she muttered. Revolting… Lets leave. Lets leave quickly Horsey.
The unicorn pricked up his ears.
Only you can make that happen. Do it.
Me? Alone? Without your help?
The unicorn nodded his horn. Ciri scratched her head sighed and closed her eyes. She concentrated.
First she felt only suspicion uncertainty and fear. But soon her mind was awash in a cold light – the light of knowledge and power. She had no idea where this source of knowledge and the wellspring of power had come from but she knew she could. She could if she wanted to.
Once again she looked at the motionless dead lake the steaming heap of waste and the skeleton of trees. In the distance the sky was illuminated by the glow of fires.
Fine she said. This is not my world.
The unicorn whinnied eloquently. She understood what he wanted to say.
And if its is mine she wiped her eyes and nose with a handkerchief then I hope that it is infinitely far away in time. Either its the distant past or…
She stopped.
The past she said dully after a moment. I believe this is the past.
The heavy rain which greeted them at their next jump was a welcome blessing. The downpour smelled of mud grass and summer and quickly washed away the dirt and dust from the dead world.
After sometime however the long cleansing became unbearable. Water spilled down Ciris collar it soaked her to the skin and started to make her uncomfortably cold. Therefore she quickly jumped from the wet place.
Because it was also not the right place or time.
The next place was very warm an intense heat prevailed there so Ciri Kelpie and the unicorn dried very quickly and the water vanished off of them like vapour from a teapot.
They were in a heath ravaged by the sun on the edge of a forest. The could immediately see it was a great forest a dense forest wild and incredibly thick.
In the throbbing heat Ciri hoped this might be the forest of Brokilon and finally a known location.
They rode slowly around the edge of the forest. Ciri looked for anything that could determine where they were. The unicorn snorted lifted his horned lead and looked around sniffing. He was restless.
Do you think Horsey she said that they can chase us?
His snort was clear and unambiguous even without the telepathy.
Have we not managed to escape far enough yet?
The thought that he sent her she didnt understand. Not far away and not close? What does that mean? The Spiral? What spiral?
She did not understand what he meant. But she understood his anxiety.
The hot heath was not the right place and not the right time.
They realised that night when the heat had yielded and in the sky over the forest appeared not one moon but two. One large and one small.
The next place was at the edge of a sea on a very steep cliff from which doves were spread out on strangely shaped rocks. The wind smelled of the ocean shrieking terns gulls and petrels and white layer covered the rocky terraces. The sea reached to the horizon framed by dark clouds.
Down on a stony beach Ciri could suddenly distinguish the skeleton of a giant monstrous fish head partly buried in the gravel. The teeth that protruded from the white jaw were over three feet in length and the jaw itself gave the sense that one could go riding through the portal of the ribs without ever touching the head or spine.
Ciri was not sure if this was her world or her time as there were fish like that there as well.
They walked along the edge of the cliff. Seagulls and albatrosses did not seem frightened at all they did not move out of the way they even pecked and slashed their beaks at Kelpie and Ihuarraquax. Ciri knew that these birds had never seen a horse or unicorn. Or humans either.
Ihuarraquax snorted shook his head and horn and was visibly uneasy.
He turned out to be correct. Something snapped like the sound of torn fabric. The gulls rose with a shriek and a flutter covering everything instantly in a cloud of white feathers. The air over the cliff suddenly trembled and became cloudy and broke like glass.
From the crack and darkness emerged riders. Behind them blew coats whose colour resembled the reflection in the sky from the setting sun.
Dearg Ruadhri. The Red Riders.
Even before the screaming birds and the warning neigh Ciri Kelpie and the unicorn turned to flee. But the air had already cracked on the other side of them and from the crack spilled riders. The pursuers formed a semicircle around them and closed pushing Ciri closer to the abyss. She screamed and pulled her sword from its sheath.
The unicorn sent her a strong signal that pierced her brain like a needle. Ciri understood immediately. He showed her the way. There was a hole in the skirmish line. The unicorn whinnied menacingly and threw himself against the elves.
Horsey!
Save yourself Star Eyes! Do not allow yourself to be caught.
She clung to Kelpies mane.
Two elves cut across her path. They held long poles with rope loops at the end. They tried to throw them around Kelpies neck. The first loop the mare gracefully ducked her head under without slowing in the least. The second loop was severed by a swing from Ciris sword. The mare swept between the elves like a storm.
But other pursuers were already on her heels Ciri hear their cries and the clatter of hooves. What happened to Horsey? What did he do?
She had no time for reflection. The unicorn was right she could not allow herself to be caught. She had to escape into space hide and lose them in the maze of places and times.
When she tried to concentrate she felt panic because in her head she suddenly found a strange emptiness and rapidly growing confusion.
They are casting a spell on me she thought. They want to deceive me with spells. But even spells have a limited range. I cannot let them get to me.
Run Kelpie!
The black mare stretched her neck and flew like the wind. Ciri stuck to her neck to provide the minimum of wind resistance.
The shouts behind them which only a moment before had been loud and dangerously close faded and were drowned out by the cries of frightened birds. Then complete silence.
Kelpie ran like a storm. The sea wind howled through their ears.
In the distant cries of their pursuers came a note of anger. They had realised that they were not going to catch her. They were never going to reach the black mare galloping without any signs of tiredness light soft and elastic like a cheetah.
Ciri did not look back. She knew that her pursuers would still be following. They would follow until their own horses began to snort wheeze and stumble almost to the ground with their mouths open and full of foam. Only then would they stop following her and shout curses and impotent threats.
Kelpie ran like the wind.
The place to where she escaped was dry and windy. The prickly wind quickly dried the tears on her face. She was alone. Alone again. A tramp and eternal pilgrim a swimmer wandering the endless oceans between the islands of places and time.
A swimmer losing hope.
The wind whistled and moaned and rushed over the cracked earth and clumps of weeks.
The wind dried her tears.
Inside her head a cool brightness murmured in her ears the constant murmur of the heart of a sea shell. There was a burning sensation in her throat. Black soft nothingness.
A new place and time another place and time. The islands of places and times.
Tonight Nimue said wrapping herself in fur will be a good night. I can feel it.
Condwiramurs said nothing although she had heard similar assurances several times. It was not the first night that they had sat on the balcony: in front of them the shining lake and the setting sun behind them the magic mirror and the magical tapestry.
From the lake echoed the curses from the fisher King who did not hesitate in voicing his distaste for fishing failures. According to his repertoire it was possible to conclude that today he had been extremely successful.
Time said Nimue has no beginning and no end. It is like the serpent Ouroboros which holds in its teeth its own tail. Every moment hides eternity and eternity is made up of moments. Eternity is an archipelago of moments which can float but navigation is extremely difficult and deviation from the course is dangerous. It is good to have a beacon that can light the way in the darkness to hear a cry through the fog…
She paused for a moment.
How do we end this interesting legend? It seems to us you and me we know how it ends. But Ouroboros still keeps his teeth in his own tail and how the legend ends will be decided in this moment. It just depends on whether the wandering swimmer sees or hears the beacon through the fog.
From the lake they could hear more swearing splashing water and the creaking of oars.
Tonight will be a good night. The last before the summer solstice. The moon wanes the sun enters the fourth house enters the sign of Capricorn. The best time to dream. Concentrate Condwiramurs.
Like so many times before Condwiramurs obediently focused until falling into a trancelike state.
Find her said Nimue. She is somewhere between the stars somewhere in the moonlight between the islands of places and times. She is alone. She needs help. Help her Condwiramurs.
Concentration fist on her temples. In her ears the sound like from inside a conch shell. A flash. And suddenly soft black nothingness.
She was in a place where Ciri could see flaming piles. The women who were in them were chained to stakes begging for mercy but the crowd laughed cheered and danced. She was in a place where a great city was burning the flames leapt from collapsing roofs and black smoke covered the sky. She was in a place where giant lizards fought and the wounds from their terrible teeth and claws flowed with blood. She was in a place where hundreds of identical white windmills intersected the air with slender blades. She was in a place where the stones rustled and rattled with the sounds of scales and the hissing of thousands of snakes.
She was in place where they was only darkness and in the darkness voices whispered in fear.
She was in a lot of other places. But none of them were right.
She transported from place to place and it was going so well she decided to start a little experiment. One of the few places where she was not afraid was the heated heath on the edge of the forest. She summoned a memory of the sight of the two moons and repeated this in her mind that this is what she wanted. Ciri concentrated strained and plunged into nothingness.
She succeed on the second try.
The success gave her confidence and encouraged her to an even more daring attempt. It was clear that part from visiting different places she could also visit different times Vysogota and the elves and mentioned it and so had the unicorns.
She did it albeit unknowingly earlier. When she had been wounded in the face she escaped her enemies by jumping to another time. She transported herself four days ahead and when Vysogota calculated the days it didnt fit…
So maybe it was her chance? To jump through time?
She decided to try it. The burning city for example would not burn eternally. What if she got there before the fire? Or after?
She jumped right into the centre of the fire. Arousing panic among the refugees who ran from their houses scorching her lashes and eyebrows.
She escaped to the friendly heath. It is not worth risking it this way she thought the devil knows what could happen. Ill stick to the proven method of jumps between different places but Ill try to get to places that I can remember. One where I was safe.
She started with the temple of Melitele imagining the gate the building the parks and workshops the dormitories of the adepts the room in which she lived with Yennefer.
She focused on the temple recalled the faces of Nenneke Eurneid Katye and Iola the Second.
It did not work. She jumped into a swamp full of mosquitoes where the whistle of turtles resounded and frogs croaked.
After she tried – without success – Kaer Morhen the Skellige islands and the bank in Gors Velen where Fabio Sachs worked. She did not dare try and enter Cintra she knew the city was occupied by the Nilfgaardians. Instead she attempted Vizima the city where she and Yennefer went shopping once.
Aarhenius Krantz a sage alchemist astronomer and astrologer squirmed on his hard stood with his eye pressed against the eyepiece of a telescope. The first magnitude comet which would only be in the sky for a week was necessary to study and describe. The learned astrologer knew that such a comet with a fiery red tail predicted great misfortune war and bloodshed. In truth this time the comet was a little late because the war with Nilfgaard had already stretched for a long time and bloodshed could be reliably predicted without celestial phenomena. But Aarehnius Krantz was thoroughly familiar with the movement of the comet and so he was going to calculate how many years or centuries until the comet returned heralding a new war to which who know they will be better prepared than the current one.
The astronomer rose rubbed his backside and went to relieve his bladder over the side of the terrace. He always pissed from the terrace directly into the bed of peonies regardless of the owners reprimands. The toilet was just too far away the time wasted in the long march there would make him risk losing valuable observations and no scientist could afford that.
He stood at the railing undid his pants and looked at the reflection of Vizimas lights in the lake. He sighed in relief and raised his eyes to the stars.
The stars he thought and constellations. Lady Winter The Seven goats the Pitcher.
According to some theories they are not just blinking light but worlds. Other worlds. Worlds which are separated from us by time and space… I firmly believe that it will be possible to travel to these other places to those other times and cosmos. Yes certainly it will be possible one day. There is a way. But this will require whole new ideas new and refreshing ideas that will burst the dogma of today…
Ah he thought if only it were possible… Attaining enlightenment finding clues! If I found one unique occasion…
Below next to the terrace something shone the dark night burst like a star and with a pop there appeared a horse with a rider on its back. The rider was a girl.
Good evening she greeted politely. I apologise if it is late. Could you tell me what this place is? And the date?
Aarhenius Krantz gulped gasped and spluttered.
The place? The girl repeated patiently. The date.
Aha… This… Ahh…
The horse snorted. The girl sighed.
We are in the wrong place I failed again. Wrong place wrong time! But try to answer me man! At least one intelligible word. Because Ive never found a world where people have forgotten how to speak!
Er…
Just one word.
Er…
Damn you fucking idiot said the girl.
And then disappeared. Along with the horse.
Aarhenius Krantz shut his mouth. He remained standing for a moment beside the railing staring into the night into the lake which reflected Vizimas lights. Then he tied up his pants and returned to his telescope.
The comet crossed the sky at full speed. It needed to be constantly monitored without looking away from the eyepiece. It needed to be watched until it disappeared into the depths of space. That was the unique opportunity that no true scholar must squander.
Ill try another way she thought as she watched the two moons. It was now seen as two narrow crescents one bigger and one smaller. Ill try it another way Ive tried imagining a place or a face Now Ill try a powerful desire. I wish strongly from my heart…
Whats the harm in trying?
Geralt. I want Geralt. I really want Geralt.
Oh no she cried. The devil take me!
Kelpie neighed confirmed her felt the same way. Steam exploded from his nostrils and his hooves sank into the snow.
The storm howled blinding them with sharp ice crystals that hacked at their faces. Cold penetrated her clothing and bit like a wolf. Ciri was shaking stooping her shoulder and her neck trying to hide herself in her raised collar.
To the right and left loomed majestic peaks granite monuments whose peaks bathed in the blizzard. In a valley a rushing river was rushing and thick with ice. Everywhere was white.
I have these abilities Ciri thought such power. Im the Lady of the Worlds but there is no point! I wanted Geralt and I find myself lost in the wilderness in winter in a blizzard.
Come Kelpie move or youll freeze! She pulled on the reins with fingers that were numb with cold. Come on bullhead! I know that this is the wrong place now well return to our warm heath. But I have to concentrate and it takes some time. So move!
The mare exhaled a cloud of steam.
The wind blew; snow fell on her face and froze her eyelashes. The wind howled and whistled.
Look! Angoulême shouted above the wind. Look there! There are hoof prints. Someone was here!
What did you say? Geralt moved the scarf which he had around his head to avoid his ears freezing. What Angoulême?
Footprints! Hoof prints!
Who could bring a horse here? Cahir also had to scream above the river Sansretour which thundered and echoed. How can you get a horse up here?
Look for yourself?
Indeed said the vampire the only member of the company that showed no symptoms of freezing obviously had equal susceptibility to low and high temperatures. Theyre tracks. But are they really from a horse?
Certainly not said Cahir running his cheeks and nose. Not in this wilderness. It must have been some wild animal. Probably an ibex.
Youre an ibex you stupid goat! Shouted Angoulême. When I say it was a horse it was a horse!
Milva as usual preferred practice to theory. She jumped from her saddle and knelt throwing back her hood.
The brat is right it is definitely a horse. Perhaps even shod but its hard to say. The wind has blown away a lot of traces. They went there into that ravine.
Ha! Angoulême rubbed her hands together. I knew it! Someone lives here! Lets follow their trail maybe well find a warm cottage. Maybe they have a fire? Perhaps theyll welcome us?
Perhaps with an arrow from a crossbow Cahir added sarcastically.
It would be wiser to stick to the plan of following the river Regis decreed in his omniscient voice. We will not run the risk of getting lost. And along the shore of the Sansretour there are trading posts we can fall back on.
What do you think Geralt?
The witcher was silent staring into the swirling snowstorm.
Well follow the tracks he said finally.
I do not… the vampire begun but Geralt did not let him finish.
Well follow the tracks! Lets go he ordered.
The spurred their horses but did not travel too far. They had gone into the ravine about a quarter mile.
Theyve ended Angoulême said looking down at the pristine snow. The horse has disappeared like in an Elvish circus.
What now witcher? Cahir turned in his saddle. The tracks have disappeared. The wind has covered them.
No disagreed Milva. The storm isnt blowing hard enough in the ravine to hide tracks.
So what happened to the horse?
The archer shrugged and huddled up in her saddle.
Where is the horse? Cahir did not give up. Did it fly away? Vanish? Or are we just dreaming?
The storm wailed over the ravine.
Why asked the vampire staring with profound insight at the witcher. Why did you lead us after the tracks Geralt?
I dont know Geralt admitted reluctantly. Something… I felt something. Something I knew. It doesnt matter. You were right Regis. Lets return to the Sansretour and stick close to the river. No more side trips along the way. According to what Reynart said real winter and bad weather are waiting for us just beyond the pass of Malheur. When we get there we will need to be at full strength. Dont just stand there lets go.
But what happened to the horse?
Whats happened to him? Muttered the witcher. His footsteps have been covered by the snow. Or maybe it wasnt a horse but an ibex.
Milva looked at him wryly but refrained from making any comment.
When they returned to the river the mysterious tracks were gone covered by wet snow.
The steel-grey Sansretour river flowed thickly with ice which twirled and twisted in the water.
I will tell you something Angoulême said. But you have to promise that you are not going to laugh.
They turned to face her. Covered with a woollen cap pulled down over her ears with cheeks and nose red from the cold wearing a large coat the girl looked funny just like a pudgy little kobold.
It is about those tracks. When I was riding with Nightingale in his Hanse they said that in winter along the mountain passes on an enchanted horse rides the King of the Mountain the ruler of the ice demons. To meet him face to face is certain death. What do you say Geralt? Is it possible…
Anything he interrupted her. Anything is possible in this company. The Malheur pass is ahead of us.
The snow whipped and lashed the wind blew and among cliffs came the whistling and howling of ice demons.
The heath to which she had jumped was not the familiar heath Ciri knew immediately. She did not even have to wait until evening she was confident that see would not see two moons.
She rode around the edges of the forest and also noticed differences. For example there were many more birches and much less beeches. She had not heard or seen any birds. There was among the clumps of heather only dry sand there used to be a green carpet. Even the grasshoppers here were different frightened by Kelpies steps. So familiar. And yet…
Her heart beat faster. She saw a path overgrown and neglected. Leading into the forest. Ciri thoroughly explored the surrounding area and made sure that the path did not end. That it did not lead to the woods but led through it. She wasted no time kicking her heels into her mare and rode into the trees. Ill ride for half a day she thought if I dont find anything Ill turn around and go the opposite direction into the heath.
She walked under the canopy of the trees looking carefully around her trying not to miss anything important. Thanks to this approach she did not miss the little old man who watched her from behind an oak.
The old man was small but not hunched. He was wearing a linen shirt and trousers of the same material. On his feet he wore enormous ridiculous looking sandals. In one hand he carried a gnarled cane and in the other a wicker basket. Ciri could not clearly see his face as it was concealed by a straw hat from which protruded a sunburned nose and a mattered grey beard.
Dont be afraid she said. I wont harm you.
Greybeard shifted from behind the oak and took off his hat. His face was round and dotted with age spots but vigorous with a little wrinkled brow and a small chin. He had long grey hair at the nape of his neck which he had pulled back into a ponytail but the crown of his head was bare shiny and yellow like a pumpkin.
She noticed that he was looking at her sword the hilt of which was protruding over her right shoulder.
Dont be afraid she repeated.
Hey hey! He said mumbling a bit. Hey hey my lady. Gramps is not afraid. Not afraid on no.
He smiled. His teeth were big and due to his receding lower jaw his upper teeth stuck out of his mouth. Therefore his speech was hard to understand.
Gramps is not afraid of strangers he said. Even bandits. Gramps is poor and pitiful. Gramps is peaceful no threat to anyone. Hey!
He smiled again. His smile seemed to be comprised of only his front teeth.
And you my lady are you afraid of Gramps?
Ciri snorted.
Im not afraid of you.
Hey hey hey! Whatever you say!
He stepped towards her leaning on his cane. Kelpie snorted. Ciri pulled on the reins.
She does not like strangers Ciri warned. And she bites.
Hey hey. Gramps understands. Bad rude pony! And out of curiosity where is the lady going? Where is she heading?
Its a long story. Where does this path lead?
Hey Hey! The young lady does not know this?
Do not answer questions with questions if you please. Where does the path lead? What is this place? And what is the date?
The old man grinned again his teeth sticking out like a beavers.
Hey hey I can see from these questions that my lady has come from far away.
Quite far she said indifferently. From another…
Time and place he finished. Gramps knows. Gramps guessed.
How have you guessed? What do you know? She asked excitedly.
Gramps knows much.
Speak!
Is my lady hungry? He said. Thirsty? Tired? Gramps will take you to his cottage give you food and drink and let you rest.
Ciri had not had time to think about food and rest. Now the words of the strange old man made her stomach rumble and her tongue stick to the roof of her mouth. The old man looked at her from under the brim of his straw hat.
Gramps he said has food and spring water at his house. And hey for your mare the mare that wants to bite Gramps. Hey hey at the house we can talk about places and times… Its not far. Will my lady accept the invitation? Will she enjoy Gramps refreshments?
Ciri swallowed.
Lead on.
Gramps turned and walked along the barely visible path measuring the way with long strokes from his cane. Ciri followed him bowing her head to keep the branches from pulling her from the saddle and keeping a firm hand on the reins to stop Kelpie from biting the old man or eating his straw hat.
Despite his claims the cottage was not close at all. When they finally reached his place the sun was almost at it zenith.
Grampss cottage proved to be picturesque made of wood with a roof which had been evidently repaired often using the first thing that had come to hand. The walls of the hut were covered with what looked like pig skins. In front of the cottage was a wooden structure in the shape of a gallows a low table and a stump with an axe sticking out of it. In the cottage was an enclosed fireplace made of stone and clay on which stood a smoking pot and pan.
Grampss home said the old man proudly this is where I live. Here is where I sleep and cook food. Come have something to eat. Hey hey it is difficult to capture food in the forest. Does my lady like the flavour of millet porridge?
I like it Ciri swallowed again. I like it.
With pork? With butter? And bacon?
Mmmm.
It is clear the old man gave her a probing look that you have not recently filled a plate full of pork and bacon. My lady is skinny. Skin and bones. Hey hey. What is that back there?
Ciri looked back. She fell for the old and most primitive trick in the world.
The heavy blow from the cane hit her directly in the head her reflexes were just enough to raise her hand and cushion some of the blow which could have broken her skull like an egg. But Ciri found herself bewildered stunned and complete disoriented.
Gramps showed his huge teeth then leapt at her and hit her again with his gnarled stick.
Ciri once again managed to protect her head with her up-raised hands but the result was her left hand falling limp probably broken. Gramps jumped to her other side and swung hitting her in the stomach. She screamed and curled into a ball. He threw himself on her like a hawk; he turned her face to the ground and crushed her knees. Ciri arched up and kicked back hitting him with a sharp blow to his elbow. Gramps roared furiously and slammed his fist onto the back of her head with such force that her face dug into the sand. He grabbed her by the hair on her neck and ground her nose and mouth into the sand. She felt suffocated.
The old man knelt on her still pushing her head into the ground pulled out her sword and tossed it to the side. His fumbling hand reached over her stomach and unlaced her pants. Ciri screamed and her mouth filled with more sand. The old man pushed harder clutching her hair in his fist. With a strong tug her pulled down her pants.
Hey hey the old man wheezed. Today Gramps caught a nice ass. It has been a long time.
Ciri felt the touch of his dry hand and cried out again through her mouth full of sand and pine needles.
Just be quiet and lay still my lady he drooled onto her buttocks. Gramps is no longer young like he used to be… But no fear the old man still knows what to do. Hey hey and then Gramps will eat you…
He did not finish the sentence he grunted and roared.
Ciri felt his grip break and broke away from him like a spring. Now she could see what had happened.
Kelpie had silently crept up from behind grabbed Gramps in her teeth and literally lifted him off the ground. The old man yelled and thrashed about kicking. Finally he managed to break free but left a lot of his grey hair in the mares teeth. He leaped for his gnarled stick but at the last moment Ciri kicked it out of his reach. The second kick she wanted to deal out was to where it was necessary but her pants pulled down to her knees restricted her movements. She pulled them up and turned but Gramps had utilised the lost time well. With several jumps he reached the stump and wrested the axe from it. He waved the axe driving Kelpie back then with a roar he lunged at Ciri raising the axe to strike.
Gramps is gonna bugger you wench! He howled wildly. Even if he has to hack you to pieces first. Gramps doesnt care if my lady is whole or filleted!
Ciri thought that she could handle his easily. He was after all a decrepit old man. She was mistaken.
Despite his age and large sandals he was as agile as a rabbit and leaped at her brandishing the axe with the skill of a butcher. When the sharpened blade almost hit her a few times Ciri realised that the only way to save herself was to escape.
But she was saved by coincidence. Stepping backwards she ran into her sword. She quickly picked it up.
Throw down the axe she yelled pulling her sword with a hiss from its scabbard. Throw down your axe you old shit maybe Ill give you your life.
He paused. Wheezing and puffing he had saliva running from his mouth into his beard.
But he did not throw down the axe. She saw in his eyes a murderous rage.
No!
Then come at me.
For a moment he looked at her as if not understanding then he gnashed his teeth roared and lunged at her. Ciri had had enough. She turned quickly and cut up from the bottom slicing his arms above the elbow. The old man dropped the axe and his bloody hands followed he immediately jumped at her again. She jumped and slashed him across the neck.
More out of pity than necessity the open arteries in his arms would have bled out in a few moments.
He lay there parting with life with incredible difficulty without his severed limbs he squirmed like a worm. Ciri stood over him. In her teeth sand gritted. She spat it out on the dying old man. Before the saliva hit him he died.
The strange construction in front of the cottage that resembled a scaffold was decorated with iron hooks and rigging. The table and the stump were slippery covered in grease and smelled. Like a slaughterhouse.
In the kitchen Ciri found a the millet porridge full of pieces of meat and mushrooms. She was very hungry but something stopped her from eating it. Instead she drank only a little water from a jug and at a small wrinkled apple.
Some stairs descended deep into a cool cellar. The shelves were stored with earthenware pots and lard. Meat hung from the ceiling. Some remnants of a thing. She ran from the cellar as if chased by demons She fell into the nettles and rose staggering away from the cottage. Despite having an empty stomach she vomited violently for a long time.
The thigh hanging in the cellar belonged to a child.
Driven by a stench she found a pit whose bottom was half flooded with water where Gramps threw his garbage everything that he did not eat. Looking at the skulls ribs and pelvises rolling in the mud Ciri realised with horror that she had survived only because of the old mans lust he wanted to rape more than he wanted food. If his hunger at that moment had been stronger that his lustful appetites he would have treacherously struck her with the axe and not the gnarled stick. He would have hung her by her feet on the wooden gallows gutted her pulled off her skin and chopped her up on the table…
Although her legs were shaking with weakness and her left hand throbbed with pain she dragged the body into the forest and plunged it into the stinking mud between the bones of his victims. She returned to the cottage with branches and dried twigs and placed them around the four sides of the house. The carefully set fire to all four sides.
She left when the fire had flared up properly. When she felt the heat heard the roar and when she was sure that a random shower would not prevent the razing of this place.
Her hand was not so bad. It was swollen yes and it hurt but there didnt seem to be any broken bones.
When evening came a single moon appeared in the sky. However Ciri did not want to accept this world as her own.
Or stay in it any longer than necessary.
Tonight Nimue whispered will be a good night. I can feel it.
Condwiramurs sighed.
The horizon burned in gold and purple. A beam of the same colours settled on the lake.
They were sitting on the terrace in chairs behind them was a mirror in an ebony frame and a tapestry depicting a small castle clinging to a rocky wall which was reflected in the water of a mountain lake.
How many evenings Condwiramurs thought will we sit up in the falling twilight and the darkness? Without any results? Just talking?
It got colder. The sorceress and the adept were wrapped in furs. From the lake came the creak of oars from the boat of the Fisher King but they could not see it as it was hidden by the blinding glow of sunset.
Quite often I dream Condwiramurs said Im in an icy wasteland where there is nothing but piles of white snow and the sun sparkling on ice. And there is silence silence calling in my ears. Unnatural silence. The silence of death.
Nimue nodded as if she knew what this meant. But she said nothing.
Suddenly it seems that I can hear something continued the adept. I can feel the surface of the ice tremble under my feet. I kneel down in the snow. The ice is clear as glass it is from a mountain lake stones and fish can be seen through the thick pane. In my dream I can also see that the layer of ice is dozens or perhaps hundreds of inches thick. This does not prevent me from hearing… people screaming for help. Below the ice… there is a frozen world.
Nimue remained silent.
Of course I know said the adept the dream is born from Ithlinnes Prophecy the famous White Winter the Time of the White Frost the time of the Wolf Blizzard. The world has perished under snow and ice that is the forecast of re-birth. Pure and better.
I deeply believe that Nimue said softly it will regenerate the world. But not that it would be better.
What?
You heard me.
I did not mishear? Nimue the Time of the White frost has been predicted many times every cold winter; people believe that it is beginning. But today not even children believe that some long winter will destroy the world.
So you can see children do not believe but I do.
Do you have some rational reasons Condwiramurs said with slight irony or is it a mystical belief in the infallibility of elven prophecies?
Nimues fingers twitched among the fur in which she was shrouded.
Our world she began in her mentoring tone has the shape of a sphere and revolves around the sun. Do you agree or do you belong to one of those tiny sects that believe the opposite?
No Im not one of them. I accept the heliocentric doctrine and believe that the earth is round.
Good. Then you know that the earths axis is tilted and the track the earth takes around the sun is not circular but elliptical?
Ive learned about it. But I am not an astronomer so…
There is no need to be an astronomer just think logically. The earth moves around the sun in an elliptical shaped orbit and so during its movements it is sometimes closer and sometimes further away. The further the earth is from the sun it is logical to think that the colder it will be. And thanks to the planetary axis the northern hemisphere is further from the light.
This is logical.
Both aspects – the ellipse of the orbit and the inclination of the axis are subject to change. Believed to be cyclic. The ellipse can be more or less elliptical elongated or shallower the axis also experiences changes. Due to the distance from the Sun and the large tilt of the earths axis the polar regions receive very little light and heat.
I understand.
Less light in the northern hemisphere means more residual snow. The white glistening snow reflects sunlight so the temperature drops even more. The snow remains even longer the larger tracts do not melt or only briefly. The more snow the more residual the more white and shiny reflective surface…
I understand.
The snow falls and falls and there becomes more and more of it. Note that the sea currents migrate from the south of the warm air. Humidity condenses over the cold areas and causes further snow to fall. The greater the temperature differences the more abundant the snowfall. It gets colder.
I understand.
The snow becomes so heavy the ice becomes pressed and forms a glacier. On which as we know the snow keeps falling squeezing it even more the glacier grows not only increasingly thick but covering more space. White spaces…
That reflects the sunlight Condwiramurs nodded. Getting colder and colder still. The White Light that Ithlinne prophesied. But can this really lead to a cataclysm? Can the ice that likes to the north suddenly start moving south crushing and covering everything? How quickly can the ice at the poles grow? How many inches a year?
As you probably know Nimue said staring at the lake the only port that does not freeze is the Gulf of Praxeda in Pont Vanis.
I know.
Enrich your knowledge. You know that a hundred years ago all the major ports in the Gulf were open water throughout the year. In the Chronicles it is recorded that even in the last century that Talgar could still grow cucumbers and pumpkins and sunflowers. Now those crops wont grow there because the growing season is too short and the winter is too rigid. Did you ever hear that Kaedwen had its own vineyard? Wines from the local vines were probably not the best but they were cheap. And the local poets sang of them. Those vines no longer grow in Kaedwen because the winters unlike the old bring severe frosts and heavy snows that kill the vines. Not only inhibits the vegetation but simply kills it. Destroys it.
I understand.
Yes reflected Nimue. Shall I tell you more? Perhaps of the snow falls in Talgar in mid November. And at the end of December and January there is snow in the catchment area of Alba where even a hundred years ago nobody had seen snow. Why at Birke do we celebrate the welcoming of spring what do you think?
Its the spring equinox. But it is true that the little children wonder because outside there is still snow on the ground. At the same time I have read that in ancient times that during Birke daffodils and crocuses had already bloomed.
You mean the ancient times not more than a hundred and twenty years ago. Historically it has been recently. Ithlinne was right the prophecy is fulfilling. The world is perishing under the ice. Mankind will perish because of the Destroyer who was to open the way to salvation. As we know from legend he did not.
For reasons that are not explained in the legend.
That is true. However the fact remains the White Frost is coming. The civilizations of the northern hemisphere are doomed. They will disappear under the sprawling ice under permafrost and snow. But there is no need to panic because it will take some time before it happens.
The Sun went down and the blinding brilliance from the surface of the lake disappeared.
Now a softer beam of light fell on the water. The moon bathed the tower of Inis Vitre in a bright glow.
How long? Said Condwiramurs. How long do we have left do you think?
A lot.
How much Nimue?
About three thousand years.
Somewhere on the lake the Fisher King struck himself with the oar and cursed loudly.
Nimue shook her head. Condwiramurs sighed.
Ive calmed down a bit. But only a little.
The next place was one of the most horrible that Ciri had seen it certainly placed in the top ten and maybe even ahead of them. It was a port she saw boats and galleys with springs and lines she saw a forest of masts and saw sails hanging heavy in the still air. Around her twisted columns of smoke smelly smoke.
The smoke rose from crooked huts also standing along the port. In them she heard voices the sound of crying children.
Kelpie jumped pulling hard on the reins and hitting her hooves hard on the cobblestones. Ciri looked down and saw dead rats. They were everywhere some of the rodents were dead other writhing in pain with pale pink legs.
Something is not right she thought suddenly feeling panic. Flee run away from here as quickly as possible.
Next to a pole where fishing nets hung a man was sitting on the ground. His shirt was torn across the chest his head was laying on his shoulder. He did not look like he was sleeping. A few steps further on lay more people. The did not move when Kelpies horseshoes tinkled on the pavement right next to their heads. Ciri bent so that she could pass under clothes hanging on a clothesline. They reeked of the staleness of dirt.
At the door to one of the huts was a cross painted with lime or white paint. Behind its roof black smoke rode into the blue sky. A child was crying someone shouted in the distance someone closer was coughing and snorting. A dog howled.
Ciris hands felt itchy. She looked down.
Her hands were covered in black fleas.
She screamed aloud. Trembling with fear and disgust she began to violently wave her arms. She startled Kelpie who took off at a gallop Ciri nearly fell off. Clutching the side of the mare with her thighs she combed her fingers through her hair ruffling it. She tore at her jacket and shirt. Kelpie continued to gallop through the smoke that blew across the street. Ciri screamed in horror.
She was going through hell the inferno the most terrible of nightmares. Among the houses marked with white crosses. Among smouldering rags. Among the dead lying alone and those who were lying in piles one on the other. And among the living ragged half naked ghouls with sunken cheeks crawling through the muck screaming in a language she did not understand stretching out their emaciated arms covered in horrible bloody pustules…
Run! Run away from here!
Even in the black nothingness of nonexistence of the archipelago of places Ciri smelt for a long time in her nostrils the smoke and the stench.
The next place was also a port. But here it was spring and it had a channel and in the channel were boats scooters yachts and a forest of masts. But in this place of masts there were screaming gulls and it smelled of joyous normal home – wet wood seawater and fish.
On the deck of a boat two men were fighting screaming with excited voices.
She understood everything that they were saying.
They were arguing over the price of herring.
Not far away stood a tavern and from its doors came the musty smell of beer and loud voices laughter and the clinking of glasses. Someone was singing a loud obscene song.
Luned card telaine arse
Aen a meath ail aen sparse!
She knew where she was. For she had read the name on the stern of one of the galleys – Evall Muire. And it port of origin – Baccala. She knew where she was.
In Nilfgaard.
She fled before anyone paid her any attention.
However before she was immersed into nothingness a flea which had jumped on her shirt at the last place and followed her through space and time jumped from her shirt onto the pier.
The flea settled onto the bare skin of a rat an old male mousy veteran of many wars which was testified by his torn ear. That evening the rat and flea boarded a vessel. And the next morning they sailed the high seas. The ship they boarded was old and dirty and bore the name Catriona. That name would go down in history. But nobody knew anything about that yet.
The next place though she could hardly believe it surprised her with a truly idyllic image. It was a quiet riverside with a lazy stream flowing among the willows alders and oaks which leant over the water. Next to a bridge with a delicate stone arch linking the two shores stood a wild vine covered inn.
Above the door swung a sign with large gold letters which Ciri did not know how to read.
However because of the inscription of a shield also nicely illustrated with a black cat on it Ciri decided to call the tavern The Black Cat.
Flowing from the tavern was the smell of food. Ciri almost fell into a swoon. It didnt take her long to decide. She adjusted the sword on her back and stepped inside.
The tap room was empty only one table sat three men who at first glance appeared to be villagers. They did not even look at Ciri who out of habit sat in a corner with her back to the wall.
The landlady a stout woman with a spotless apron and a cap came up to her and asked something. Her voice was thunderous but melodious. Ciri poked one finger towards her mouth and patted her stomach then took a silver button from her blouse and laid it on the table. Seeing the surprised expression on the womans face she was about to pluck a second button but the woman stopped her with a gesture.
The silver button provided her with a heavy casserole and vegetable soup a pot of timber beans and smoked meat bread and a jug of watered wine.
From the first tablespoon Ciri thought she was going to cry. But she controlled herself. She ate slowly. Relishing it all.
The landlady came over and asked her a ringing question and put her hands to her cheek. She wanted to know if she was staying the night.
I dont know said Ciri. Maybe. In any case thank you for the invitation.
The woman smiled and walked into the kitchen.
Ciri undid her belt and leaned back against the wall. She wondered what to do next. This place in contrast to some previous ones was pleasant and she was tempted to stay longer.
However experience had taught her that excessive confidence can be dangerous and a lack of vigilance can be fatal.
From out of nowhere a black cat appeared exactly the same as the one on the signboard.
It arched its back and rubbed itself on her calf. She stroked the cat and he pushed his head into her palm then settled down beside her and began to lick his fur. Ciri watched.
She saw Jarre sitting next to a fire in a circle with ugly rogues. They all nibbled at something that resembled a piece of coal.
Jarre?
It has to be this way said the boy while watching the dancing flames. I read about it in the History of War Marshal Pelligrams work. So it is necessary when the country is in danger.
What is necessary? Eating coal?
Yes. Exactly so. The motherland calls. And partly for personal reasons.
Ciri do not fall asleep in the saddle Yennefer said. We have arrived.
The had arrived at a city where the doors and gates of the houses had painted white crosses on the. They rode into a dense suffocating smoke coming from the bodies of the dead who were being burned. Yennefer didnt seem to notice.
I have to beautify.
Before her face above the ears of her horse appeared a mirror. It danced in the air along with a brush that combed her raven tresses. Yennefer only uses magic and not her hands because…
Her hands were covered in masses of clotted blood.
Mother! What did they do?
Get up girl Coen says. Master the pain get up again on the comb. Otherwise youll catch fear. Do you want to be afraid the rest of your life?
His yellow eyes shine in an unpleasant manner. His sharp white teeth flash. Then its not Coen. It is a cat a black cat…
A column of an army many miles long marches. Above them wave a forest of spears and banners. Jarre has a round helmet on his head and a pike on his shoulder which he has to hold with both hands otherwise the weight would unbalance him. Drums and bagpipes echo and thunder the songs of war. Above the column crows fly. Many crows…
A lake shore a field of reeds. An island on the lake. On the island a tower with jagged battlements. Above the tower in the darkening evening sky the moon shines and makes the tower glow. On the balcony are sitting two women wrapped in furs. A man fishes on a boat…
A tapestry and a mirror.
Ciri lifted her head with a jerk. In front of her sitting at the table is Eredin Breacc Glas.
You should know he said grinning with his even teeth that you are only delaying the inevitable. You belong to us and well find you.
Never.
You will come back to us. You have seen a couple of times and places but sooner or later youll get to the Spiral. And the Spiral is ours. You will never get back to your world and time. After all it is already too late you have nothing to return to. The people that you knew are long dead their graves overgrown with grass and their names forgotten. Your name too…
Youre lying! I do not believe you!
Your belief is your thing. But know that soon you will come to the Spiral and Ill be there waiting. Admit that you secretly long for me me elaine luned.
You are delusional!
We Aen Elle perceive such things. You were fascinated with me and you were afraid of your desires. You still want me Zireael. My hands their touch…
She jumped to her feet overturning her cup fortunately empty and grabbed her sword.
She immediately calmed down. She was in the Black Cat inn. She had fallen asleep at the table. The hand that had touched her hair was the landladys. Ciri was not fond of this kind of contact but the woman simply radiated kindness for which Ciri could not repay with rudeness. She allowed her to stroke her head with a smile and listened to her melodious speech. She was tired.
I have to go she said at last.
The woman smiled and spoke in her singsong voice.
How is it possible thought Ciri in all the worlds places and times in all languages and dialects this word is always understandable? And always the same?
Yes I have to. My mother is waiting for me.
The landlady escorted her into the yard. Before Ciri could jump into the saddle she suddenly hugged her tightly pressing her into her plump breasts.
Goodbye. Thank you for your hospitality. Forward Kelpie.
She went straight over the arched bridge over the calm river. When the mares horseshoes rang on the stones she looked up. The woman was still standing at the front of the inn.
Concentration fists on her temples. A noise in her ears like the sound of a sea shell. A flash. Soft black nothingness.
Good luck my girl Théres Lapin owner of the pub Au Chat Noir in Pont-sur-Yonne on the road from Melun to Auxerre.
Godspeed!
Concentration fist on her temples. A noise in her ears like the sound of a sea shell. A flash. Soft black nothingness.
Places. A lake. An island. The moon like a half thaler its brilliance glowing over the water of a lake. The mast of a boat with a man fishing…
On the terrace of the tower… Two women?
Condwiramurs could not stand it she shouted with excitement and then immediately covered her mouth with her hand. The Fisher King dropped his nets with a splash and the swore terribly then with his mouth open he froze. Nimue did not move.
On the surface of the lake on a ray of moonlight Appeared a black horse with a rider on her back.
Nimue calmly reached out and shouted a spell. The tapestry on the wall in the room bust into multicoloured lights. The lights reflected in the oval mirror danced on the walls like coloured bees and then sailed out of the room like a rainbow as light as a ribbon that lit up the lake like the first rays of dawn.
The black mare lifted her head and whinnied loudly. Nimue abruptly extended her hands and shouted another spell. Condwiramurs saw an image forming in the air growing more tightly focused. The image immediately popped into focus. Then became a portal. A gate beyond which they could see…
A plain full of shipwrecks. A castle stuck on a sharp cliff lording over the dark mirror of a mountain lake…
Over there! Nimue shouted loudly. This is the path that you must follow! Ciri Pavettas daughter! Enter the portal follow the path that leads to your meeting with fate! That closes the wheel of time! Let Ouroboros bite his own tail. Do not wander anymore! Hurry to help your loved ones! This is the right way to go witcheress!
The mare snickered and buried her hooves in the air. The girl in the saddle turned her head looking alternatively at them and the image produced by the tapestry and mirror. She tossed her hair from her face on which Condwiramurs saw the scar.
Believe me Ciri cried Nimue. You know me! Weve seen each other once already!
I remember they heard her answer. I believe you. Thank you.
They watched her spur the mare towards the portal. Before the image faded the ashen-haired girl turned in the saddle and waved.
Then everything disappeared. The lake was calm the bar of moonlight settled. It was so quiet they thought they could hear the loud breathing of the Fisher King.
Nimue refrained from tears and tightly embraced Condwiramurs. She was like a little trembling fairy. They remained in the embrace for some time. Without words they both turned and looked at the place where the Gate of Worlds had disappeared.
Godspeed witcheress! They cried in unison. Good luck on your journey!
Not far from the battlefield where that terrible battle between almost the entire North was facing almost all of the aggressor Nilfgaards power there were two fishermen villages – Old Butts and Brenna. However since Brenna was burned to the ground people used to talk about the Battle of Old Butts. Today however it is referred to as the Battle of Brenna for two reasons – First Brenna is now restored and is now a prosperous settlement while Old Butts was abandoned by its inhabitants a long time ago and is now overgrown with nettles and weeds. Secondly – the original name in the context of that grand and tragic struggle seemed extremely awkward as if it were not enough that roughly thirty thousand unfortunates gave their lives but with their butts that were old.
So in historical literature the military has taken to calling it the Battle of Brenna and not just in our writings but in Nilfgaards who have many more sources than ours.
Reverend Jarre the Elder of Ellander
Annales seu Cronicae Incliti Regni Temeriae
CHAPTER EIGHT
Cadet Fitz-Oesterlen youve failed. Sit down. I would like to draw your attention to this cadets ignorance of important and famous events from the history of his native country that every good citizen and patriot should know but for a future office is simply inexcusable. And one more thing cadet. For twenty years I have worked at this school and I do not remember even a single semester when an exam hasnt had a question about the Battle of Brenna. Your ignorance practically eliminates your chances for a military career but when you become a baron there is no obligation to become an officer so maybe you can try your hand at politics. Or diplomacy. I wish this wholeheartedly Cadet Fitz-Oesterlen. The rest of us will get back to the Battle of Brenna gentlemen. Cadet Puttkammer!
Present!
To the map please and continue. From where the lord Barons knowledge failed.
As ordered! When Field Marshal Menno Coehoorn heard the reports from the secret service confirming that the Nordlings armies were coming to aid the besieged fortress of Mayena he decided to make a quick march to the west. His plan was to cut off the enemy troops and to force them into a decisive battle. For this purpose he distributed the Centre Group Army. Some of his forces he left at Mayena the rest of his forces rapid marched…
Cadet Puttkammer! Are you a writer of historical fiction or a future military commander? What is the name for the rest of his forces? Please give me the exact orde de bataille of Marshal Coehoorns strike team. Using military terminology!
Yes commander. Field Marshal Coehoorn had at that time two armies – the Fourth Cavalry Army led by Major General Marcus Braibant patron of our school…
Very good Cadet Puttkammer.
Fucking toady Cadet Fitz-Oesterlen hissed from his bench.
…And the Third Army commanded by Lieutenant General Rhetz de Mellis-Stoke. The Fourth Cavalry Army with a strength of twenty thousand soldiers was comprised of the following units – the Venendal Division the Magne Division the Frundsberg Division the Second Vicovaro Brigade the Seventh Daerlan Brigade the Nauzicaa Division and the Vrihedd Brigade. The Third Army was composed of the Alba Division the Deithwen Division and… umm. The Division…
The Ard Feainn Division said Julia Abatemarco. If your men didnt mistake anything. They really had banners with silver suns on them?
Yes Colonel said the commander of the scouts without hesitation.
So Ard Feainn mused Pretty Kitty. Thats interesting. This means that in the three marching columns that you saw not only is the Fourth Army coming against us but most of the Third as well. I do not believe it; I have to see it with my own eyes. Captain take over command during my absence. Send out immediately a transmission to Colonel Pangratt…
Colonel Abatemarco is it reasonable for you to personally…
Thats an order!
As you command!
This is a gamble Colonel the commander of the scouts shouted over the thunder of hooves. We could run into a company of elven scouts.
Dont talk! Lead!
They galloped through a valley past a stream and then turned into some woods. They had to slow down as their riding was hindered by the undergrowth; also there was the threat of running into one of the Nilfgaardian reconnaissance patrols. Even though the condottieri scout approached from the flank of the enemy not from the front there was still a good chance the flank was protected. The actions they took were risky as hell. But Pretty Kitty was known for such frivolous things. And there was not in the whole of the Free Company any soldier who wouldnt have followed her – even to hell.
Its here said the commander of the scouts. This is the tower.
Julia Abatemarco shook her head. The tower was twisted ruined bristling with broken beams and a patchwork of holes that the west wind blew through whistling like a bagpipe. No one had any idea who or why the tower had been built in this secluded spot. But it was known that it had been built a long time ago.
It will not collapse?
Certainly not Colonel.
Among the Free Company the condottieri did not use sir or maam. Only rank.
Julia swiftly climbed to the top of the tower. The commander of the scouts joined her after some time panting like a bull covering a cow. Pretty Kitty stood on the tilted battlements and watched the horizon through a spyglass while putting her tongue between her teeth and sticking out her bottom. At the sight the commander of the scouts felt a slight thrill. However for his own safety he quickly mastered it.
On my soul Ard Feainn Julia Abatemarco licked her lips. I can see the Seventh Daerlan the elves of the Vrihedd Brigade our friends from Maribor and Mayena… Aha! There are also the skullheads the famous Nauzicaa Brigade… I can also see the flames of the armoured Deithwen Division… And the white banner with the black Alerion of the Alba Division.
You recognized them muttered the commander like old acquaintances… How do you know them?
I graduated from the military academy said Pretty Kitty carelessly as if it was nothing. I am a career officer. Well I saw what I wanted to see. Lets go back to the banner.
He has brought against us the Fourth Cavalry Army and the Third Julia Abatemarco said. I repeat the whole of the Fourth Cavalry and the Third Army. Behind the vanguard I saw dust clouds reaching up to the sky. In those three columns I estimate about forty thousand horses maybe more. Maybe…
Maybe Coehoorn divided his Centre Group Army finished Adam Adieu Pangratt chosen to be the supreme commander of the Free Company. Maybe he took only his Fourth Cavalry and the horses from the Third and no infantry so he could proceed as quickly as possible… Ha you know what Id do if I were coming up against King Foltests constable Natalis…
I know Pretty Kittys eyes flashed with amusement. I know what youd do youd send runners.
Of course.
Natalis is a cunning fox. Maybe tomorrow…
Maybe Adieu said again. I guess he thinks like me. Come with me Julia I want to show you something.
They moved ahead of the rest of the army. The sun was almost touching the hills to the west the forest and grassland darkened and the valley was filled with a long shadow. However it was still light enough for Pretty Kitty to immediately notice what Pangratt wanted to show her.
Here Adieu said confirming her guess. If I was the commander of our forces this is where I would pose the battle tomorrow.
It is good terrain Julia admitted. Hard straight and plain… We could marshal the forces there… on those plains. And that hill is an idea command post.
Youre right. Look right in the middle of the valley there is a lake and we can use that tactically as well with the river although they are shallow they have marshy shores… What was the river called Julia? The one we passed through yesterday. Do you remember?
I forgot. The Scoop I guess. Or something like that.
Those who are familiar with the local surroundings can easily imagine the situation better than someone who has to rely solely on cartography to find the settlement of Brenna. It was to this settlement that the royal army arrived in truth there was no settlement because during a battle the year before Elven commandos burned it to the ground. It was there on the left flank that the Redanian contingent commanded by Count de Ruyter took a position. He had eight thousand men infantry and cavalry.
The centre of the army was located under the hill which was later called Gallows Hill.
On this high ground stood King Foltests constable John Natalis which gave him a perfect view of the battlefield. Below him were grouped the main strength of our troops – twelve thousand Temerian and Redanian infantry formed into four square units beyond which were arrayed ten banners of heavy cavalry. In reserve were three thousand Maribor infantry under the command of Voivode Bronibor.
From the southern shore of the lake which the local residence called Gold which meandered down to the Cholta were deployed the units of our right flank – The Volunteer Army of Mahakam dwarves eight squadrons of light cavalry and factions of the great condottieri the Free Company. The right flank was under the command of Adam Pangratt and the dwarf Barclay Els.
At a distance of nearly two miles across from the royal army the army of Nilfgaard was mobilized under the command of Field Marshal Menno Coehoorn. Its armed populous stood like an iron wall regiment after regiment company after company squadron after squadron as far as the eye could see. And through the forest of banners and halberds you could see that their position was not only wide but also deep.
Their army was about forty-six thousand strong at that time however only a few people knew this. Which was fortunate because the determination of many of our soldiers did not waver at the sight of the immense power of Nilfgaard.
But even the most bold of heart had theirs pounding faster under their armour because it was obvious that a difficult and bloody battle was about to begin here soon and that many of those lined up here would not see the sunset.
Jarre pushed up his glasses which had slipped down onto his nose and re-read through the entire piece of text again sighed rubbed his bald head and erased the last sentence.
The wind whispered through the linden trees and bees buzzed. Children as children do tried to out-shout one another.
A ball bounced off of a wall and stooped at the feet of the old man. Before he could awkwardly reach down one of his grandsons passed him and grabbed the ball while running.
As he passed he banged the table. Jarre with his right hand saved the inkwell from falling and with the stump of his left hand held the ream of paper.
Bees yellow and heavy with pollen from the linden trees buzzed loudly overhead.
Jarre resumed writing.
The morning was cloudy but the sun pierced the clouds to explicitly remind us of the passing hours. The wind picked up the flags and banners fluttered like a flock of birds rising to depart. Before us the Nilfgaardians were still and all began to wonder why Field Marshal Menno Coehoorn did not give the order to attack…
When? Menno Coehoorn looked up from his map and planted his eyes on his commanders. You want to know when Ill give the order to attack?
No one answered. Menno watched his officers. Those who seemed the most tense and nervous were those who had to stay in the reserve. Elan Trahe commander of the Seventh Daerlan and Kees van Lo of the Nauzicca brigade. Clearly nervous too was Ouder de Wyngalt the aide-de-camp of Field Marshal Coehoorn who had not even come close to a battle field.
But those who personally commanded battle actions looked calm even bored. Marcus Braibant yawned Rhetz de Mellis-Stoke was picking at his ear with his little finger Colonel Ramon Tyrconnel the young commander of the Ard Feainn division softly whistled while his eyes wandered over the distant horizon. Another of the promising young officers Colonel Liam aep Muir Moss of the Deithwen division flicked through a pocket volume of his favourite verses. The commander of the Alba division of Lancers Tobor Eggebracht was scratching at his collar with the handle of a riding whip like a coachman.
The attack will start Coehoorn said when the reconnaissance patrols return. Im worried about the hills to the north. Before we strike gentlemen I must know who or what is behind them.
Lamarr Flaut was terribly afraid. Fear gripped his bowels and it seemed to him that his intestines were coated with slimy eels that were doggedly searching for a way to get to freedom. An hour earlier the patrol had received orders which had been put into motion. Flaut in the depth of his mind was hoping that the fear would be drowned out by the cold morning and routine a ritual that he had exercised a hundred times harsh serve and military ceremonial. He was wrong. Now after an hour and travelling about five miles deep into the dangerous enemy territory the fear still gnawed at him.
The patrol stopped on the hillside below the fir forest. The riders were carefully concealed in a growth of tall junipers. Before them stretched a wide valley. Fog spun around the top of the grass.
Nobody said Flaut. Not a soul. Lets go back. Weve travelled too far.
The sergeant looked at him in askance. Far? They had barely gone a few miles and moved like lame turtles.
We should he said go out there to the opposite hill Lieutenant. We will have a better view. Especially of both valleys. From there we can see if anyone is in the other valley. What do you think sir? It is only a few yards.
A few yards Flaut thought. In open terrain which is as flat as a pan. The eels writhed and sought a way out of his guts. Flaut felt that at least one of them was on the right track.
I heard the jingle of spurs. A horse snorting. There among those pines on that sandy slope. Is something moving there? A silhouette? Are we being surrounded?
A rumour ran through the camp a few days ago that the condottieri Free Company had caught in an ambush a party from the Vrihedd brigade and managed to capture an elf alive. It was said that he had been castrated; his tongue had been torn out all of his fingers cut off of his hand… And finally they put out his eyes.
Then they joked saying he would not be able to have fun with his elven whores. And he wouldnt be able to watch others having fun.
Well sir? The sergeant spoke hoarsely. Do we approach the hill?
Lamarr Flaut swallowed.
No he said. Lets not waste time. We have found nothing; there are no enemies here. We have to go back and give our report to the commander. Lets go back!
Menno Coehoorn listened to the report and raised his head from the map.
To the banners he ordered shortly. Mister Braibant Mister Mellis-Stoke. Attack!
Long live the Emperor! Yelled Tyrconnel and Eggebracht. Menno looked at them strangely.
To the banners he repeated. May the Great Sun shine on your glory.
Milo Vanderbeck a Halfling and a field surgeon who was better known by his nickname Rusty sucked through his nostrils the familiar mix of smells of iodine ammonia alcohol and magical elixirs that floated around the tent. He wanted to savour the fragrance of this now while it was still healthy pure and clinically sterile. He knew that it would not stay this way for long.
He looked at the operation table still as white as driven snow and his instruments the dozens of tools engendered respect and trust with the impassive and menacing dignity of its cold steel pristine cleanliness orderly placement and aesthetics.
Gathered around the instruments was his bustling staff – three women. No Rusty mental corrected himself. A woman and two girls. No. One old yet beautiful and young-looking woman. And two children.
The sorceress and healer named Marti Sodergren. And two volunteers. Shani a student from Oxenfurt. And Iola a priestess from the Temple of Melitele in Ellander.
Marti Sodergren I know Rusty thought Ive already worked with this beauty more than once. A little nymphomaniac she also has a tendency towards hysteria but so long as she works her magic. Her spells for anaesthetics disinfectants and to stop haemorrhages.
Iola is a priestess or rather an adept. A girl of ordinary beauty like a linen cloth and big strong peasant hands. The temple prevented her hands from being stained with dirt in a silt field. But she could not disguise her origin. No Rusty thought in principle I have nothing to fear from her. These hands are peasant hands trustworthy hands. In addition the girls at the temple rarely fail and in moments of stress do not crack but look back on their religion in their mystical faith. Interestingly; it helps.
He looked at the red-haired Shani deftly threading curved suture needles.
Shani. A child from the meagre neighbourhood that received her education at the University due to her infinite desire for knowledge and unimaginable sacrifice of poor parents. A student. What can she do? Threading needles? Tightening a tourniquet? Holding hooks? The question is whether the red-head will faint drop the hooks and go nose first into the open abdomen of the patient being operated on?
Humans are not very resilient he thought. I asked them to give me an elf. Or someone of my own race. But they did not. They do not trust us. Or me anyway. Im a halfling. Not human. Alien.
Shani!
Yes Mister Vanderbeck?
Rusty. That is for you Mister Rusty. What is this Shani? What is it for?
Are you examining me Mister Rusty?
Answer girl!
This is a scraper! To remove the periosteum during an amputation! In order for the periosteum not to burst under the serrated blade you must saw cleanly! Are you satisfied? Have I gained your approval?
Quiet girl quiet.
He ran his fingers through his hair.
Interesting he thought. Here we have four doctors. And all are redheads! Is this fate or what?
Please come out ladies he nodded to his assistants before the tent.
They obeyed. But each of the three muttered under their breath. Each in their own way.
Before the tent sat a group of medics enjoying the last minutes of sweat idleness. Rusty gave them a stern look and sniffed to see if they were already drunk.
The blacksmith a muscular fellow was busy rearranging tools on his bench that would be used to rescue the wounded from warped armour and helmets.
There Rusty began without preamble pointing towards the battlefield will soon begin a bloodbath. And right afterwards we will get our first wounded. You all know what to do where your position is and what your responsibilities are. If you behave accordingly you can not go wrong. Are we clear?
The girls listened to his speech without comment.
There Rusty pointed in the same direction as before will soon begin hundreds of thousands of people trying to hurt and kill each other. In very sophisticated ways. In this and two other hospitals we have twelve doctors. There is no way in the world well be able to help all those in need. Not even a fraction of those in need. And to tell you the truth no one even expects that from us. But we will treat them. Because it is sorry for the cliché the reason for our existence. To those who need us.
His listeners remained silent. Rusty shrugged.
We cannot do more than we can he said quieter and warmer. But we will do our all we can do no less than that.
Theyre charging Constable John Natalis said while wiping his sweaty palms on his pants. The Nilfgaardians are charging Your Majesty they are coming for us!
King Foltest mastered his dancing horse a white horse decorated with lilies on his saddle and turned his noble profile worthy of decorating coins towards the constable.
We must prepare an appropriate welcome Lord Constable! Officers!
Death to the Black Ones! Yelled the condottiere Adam Adieu Pangratt and Count de Ruyter. The Constable straightened in his saddle and took a deep breath.
To the banners!
Drums reverberated cymbals crashed and horns sounded. The earth trembled under the tens of thousands of hooves.
Now said the Halfling Andy Biberveldt brushing the hair from his pointy ears. It begins…
Tara Hildebrandt Didi Hofmeier and the others who were gathered around the wagons nodded. They could hear the dull monotonous thud of hooves coming from behind the hill and forest. They could feel the ground shaking.
Then beyond the forest arose cries. And the noise intensified.
The first volley from the archers said Andy expertly who had already seen – or rather heard – many battles. There will be another one.
He was right.
Now theyll collide.
Ma…ma…maybe we could… hide… under the… wagon William Hardbottom proposed stuttering and writhing uneasily.
Biberveldt and the others looked at the Halfling with pity.
Under? The wagons? What for? We are separated from the battle by nearly a quarter of a mile. And even if a patrol came here to the rear hiding under the wagon would not save our lives.
The noise from the fighting intensified.
Now Andy Biberveldt estimated and was right again. From a distance of a quarter of a mile through the forest came the sound of the royal army colliding with iron and a horrible sound that bristled the hair.
Terrible desperate wild squeals and whinnies from animals being mutilated.
The cavalry… Biberveldt licked his lips. The cavalry impaled on pikes…
The old chronicler used the sponge and erased the next sentence with whose wording he was not satisfied. He closed his eyes reminding himself of that day. The moment when the two armies collided. Where both armies as fierce as mastiffs jumped at each others throats tightening in a deadly embrace.
Jarre looked for the words with which to describe it.
In vain.
A wedge was driven into the side of the Temerian infantry. A gargantuan live ram of the Alba division crushing everything that protected the living bodies of the infantry – pikes spears shields and halberds.
The Alba division struck like a dagger into a living body and shed blood. Horses slipped on the blood slicked ground. But although the tip of the dagger penetrated very deep it did not hit the heart or any vital organs. The wedge of the Alba division instead of crushing and dismembering the Temerian infantry dug in and got stuck. They remained stuck in the mass of infantry thick and viscous like pitch.
At first it did not seem so threatening. The head and wings of the wedge were made up of elite troops in heavy armour from their shields and armour blows bounced off like a blacksmiths hammer off of an anvil they had also chosen well protected mounts. And although every now and again one of the armoured troops fell and the horse with him their swords and axes fell among the infantrymen in a bloody harvest. Surrounded by a mob the division began to penetrate deeper.
Albaaa! Junior Lieutenant Devlin aep Meara heard the battle cry of Colonel Eggebracht rising above the clatter of weapons and the roar of men and the neighing of horses. Forward Alba! For the Emperor!
They moved forward chopping pounding and thrusting. Under the reluctant horses hooves could be heard sloshing cracking and wailing.
Albaaa!
The wedge became stuck again. The landsknechts although crushed and bleeding did not yield and surrounded the cavalry like a vice. The earth trembled. Under the bludgeoning of the halberds and the flails the first line of the wedge fell apart. Riddled with halberds and clubs torn from their mounts by hooks the knights of the Alba division began to die.
The dagger stuck in the Temerian infantry was now not so much crippling iron in a living organism but was now like an icicle in the grip of a peasant.
Temeriaaa! For the King! Kill the Black Ones!
It was not easy for the landsknechts. The Alba division did not burst apart. Swords and axes rose and fell and for every fallen rider the fierce infantry paid the price in blood.
The tip of a spear found its way into the crack in the armour of Eggebracht and thrust into it. The Colonel cried and swayed in his saddle. Before his men could help him the combat swept him to the ground and the infantry fell upon him.
The black banner with the Alerion wobbled and fell. Heavy cavalry among them Junior Lieutenant Delvin aep Meara rushed in that direction chopping slashing trampling and yelling.
I wonder thought Devlin aep Meara removing his sword from the shattered skull of a Temerian landsknecht. I wonder he thought deflecting a blow aimed at him what is the point of all this? And who is to blame?
Uh… And then the Great Masters gathered at… Our Venerable Mother… uh… Whose memory will always live within us… For the… Er… great champions of the First Lodge of… consulted… and decided…
You did not prepare adept Abonde. You have failed. Go sit down.
But I learned it. Really…
Sit down.
Why do they have to teach that old nonsense Abonde muttered sitting down. Who cares about it today… And what is the use…
Silence! Adept Nimue!
Present Mistress.
Can you answer the questions? If not sit straight and do not waste my time.
I can.
Well Im listening.
So it stands in the annals that the convent of masters took place at the Castle of Bald Mountain and there they agree to end the destructive war between the Emperor and the Kings of the North. Reverend Mother Assire the holy martyr decided that the rulers would not stop fighting until completely exhausted. Whereupon Reverend Mother Philippa the holy martyr decided Lets give them an unimaginably horrible cruel and bloody battle a battle that will be unprecedented. That the imperial armies and troops of the kings will be swimming in the blood of that battle and then we the Grand Lodge will force them to make peace. And that is exactly what happened. The Reverend Mothers created the Battle of Brenna. And then the rulers were forced to sign for peace at Cintra.
Well done adept Nimue. Id give you an A… if not for the word so at the beginning of the speech. Do not start a sentence with so. Sit down. And now we will talk about the Peace of Cintra…
The bell rang for recess. But the adepts did not react with the immediate snap and clatter of desks. They kept their calm and dignity a distinguished tranquillity.
They were not snotty first years. They were third years. They were already fourteen. And that was important.
This is the only possible solution Rusty assessed the status of the first of the wounded who was covering the clean operation table with blood. The thigh bone is crushed. The artery has not been cut otherwise it would have been a corpse brought here. It looks like an axe blow with which the saddle served as a wooden block. You can look for yourselves…
Iola and Shani bent over the wounded soldier Rusty rubbed his palms together.
As I said there is nothing to heal here; we will just have to cut. To work. Iola a tourniquet. Tighten it harder. Shani a scalpel. Not that one. The larger one for amputation.
The wounded man kept shooting terrified glances at their hands watching their actions through the eyes of an animal caught in a trap.
A little magic Marti if you please The Halfling bent over the patient so as to minimize his field of vision.
I have to amputate son.
Noooo! The wounded man said thrashing his head trying to escape Marti Sodergrens hands. I dont want you to!
I have to amputate or you will die.
Id rather die… The wounded mans movements were getting slower under the influence of the healing magic. Id rather die than be maimed… Let me die… I beg you… Let me die!
I cannot Rusty raised the scalpel and looked at the bright blade of immaculate steel. I cannot let you die. I am a doctor.
He strongly pressed the blade into the skin and cut deeply. The wounded man howled.
The sound was inhuman.
The messenger stopped the horse so suddenly that sparks emerged from under the hooves. Two assistants seized the halter and calmed the frothy stallion. The messenger dropped to the ground.
Who are you? John Natalis said. Who sent you?
Lord de Ruyter… wheezed the messenger. We have stopped the Black Ones but we have suffered terrible losses. Lord de Ruyter is asking for reinforcements.
No the Constable replied after a moment of silence. Youll have to endure. You have to!
Look here Rusty said pointing like a collector who was showing his collection. Kindly look at the resulting cut from a blow to the abdomen. Someone has beat us to it and made this unfortunate amateur laparotomy. Good thing he was brought here with care and has not lost most of the important organs… At least I hope not… Whats wrong Shani? Why the look on your face? Up until now have you only known men from the outside?
The intestines are damaged Mister Rusty…
A diagnosis as accurate as evident! I dont even have to look just smell. A handkerchief Iola. Marti there is still too much blood be so kind as to give us some of the priceless magic of yours. Shani clamp here you can see how much he is bleeding. Iola scalpel.
Who wins? The soldier was quite awake his eyes bulging. Tell me… Who wins?
Boy Rusty said hunch over the open bloody pulsating abdominal cavity. That is the last thing Id be interested in if I was in your place.
On the left flank and in the centre a fierce fight still lasted but even though the Nilfgaardian army was hard and persistent they broke upon the Kings army like a sea wave breaks against the rocks. For there stood the brave soldiers from Maribor Vizima and Tretogor and the grim landsknechts the mercenary professionals the cavalry did not scare.
And there they fought truly like the sea against the rocks and continued to fight and it was not possible to guess who would win because even though the waves beat against the rock it did not weaken or disappear and it stood there between the raging waves.
Like an old hawk who knows where to fall and attack so Field Marshal Menno Coehoorn knew where to strike. With the iron fist of his army which consisted of the Deithwen division and Ard Feainn division he struck at the enemy lines above Golden Pond.
That place was fiercely defended by the troops from Brugge but they were less armed and armoured and morale was low. They managed to hold off the attack of the Nilfgaardians. In a breath of relief two flags of the Free Company under the command of Adam Pangratt arrested the Nilfgaardians but both sides paid dearly in blood.
However the dwarves of the Volunteer brigade were facing a terrible siege and the threat of encirclement which would threaten to tear apart the formation of the royal army.
Jarre dipped his pen into the inkwell. His grandchildren played in the yard their laughter ringing like bells.
Seeing the danger threatening however John Natalis attentive as a crane understood what was happening at the time and without waiting he sent a messenger with orders to Colonel Els…
In all the naivety of his seventeen years the trumpeter Aubry thought that he could get down to the right wing transmit his orders and be back up the hill in no more than ten minutes. Absolutely no more! Not on Chiquita his light foot mare.
Even before he reached the Golden Pond the trumpeter realised two things – He didnt know when he would reach the right wing and he didnt know when he would get back. And that Chiquitas agility would be very useful to him.
At the east end of Golden Pond fighting raged. The Black Ones fought against Brugges cavalry which was protecting the infantry. Before the eyes of the trumpeter
from the heat of the battle rode individual riders in green yellow and red robes who fled at a gallop towards the river. Behind them like a black river spilled the Nilfgaardians.
Aubry jerked the reins stopping his mare ready to turn her and flee out of the way of the fugitives and pursuers. But his sense of duty prevailed. The trumpeter clung to the horses neck and went into a wild gallop.
Around him was shouting and confusion a kaleidoscopic jumble of silhouettes the glitter of swords crashes and rattles.
Some of the men from Brugge where backed up to the pond and put up a desperate fight milling about their flags with a crossed anchor. On the field the Black Ones murdered the infantry who were devoid of support.
Before his eyes swirled a black cloak with a silver sun on it.
Evgyr Nordling!
Aubry yelled and Chiquita excited by the howling took off at a gallop saving his life by putting it out of reach of the Nilfgaardians sword. Above his head arrows whistled and flashed around the blurring silhouettes.
Where am I? Where are ours? Where is the enemy?
Evgyr morv Nordling!
The thunder of hooves neighing of horses banging of weapons shouting.
Stop you little shit! Not that way!
A womans voice. A woman on a chestnut stallion in armour her hair dishevelled and her face splattered with blood. Behind her were armed horsemen.
Who are you? She said smearing the blood on her face with the back of her hand which held a sword.
Trumpeter Aubry Second Lieutenant to Constable Natalis… with orders for Colonels Pangratt and Els…
There is no way youll get to Adieu through the fighting. Well go to the dwarves. Im Julia Abatemarco… Fuck! Theyre flanking us! Ride!
He did not have time to protest. Similarly it would not have made sense.
After a while of furious galloping they emerged from the dust in front of the infantry square who were defending themselves like a turtle with a wall of shields and like the skin of a hedgehog covered with spears. Over the square loomed a huge banner with crossed hammers and next to it was a pole with skulls and horsetails.
The square who were moving and jumping around like a dog escaping from an old man waving a stick were being attacked by the Nilfgaardians. The Ard Feainn division who thanks to their coats with the silver sun on them could not be mistaken for any other.
Strike Free Company! Screamed the woman raising her sword. Make them pay!
The riders – and with them Aubry – charged the Nilfgaardians.
The battle only took a few moments. But it was horrible. Then the wall of shields opened before them. They were inside the square in a crushing ring of dwarves in mail shirts and helmets among the Redanian infantry the cavalry of the Brugge and the light armoured condottiere.
Julia Abatemarco – Pretty Kitty Commander of the condottiere – who Aubry only now recognised – led him to a stocky dwarf in a helmet decorated with a red plume sitting on a captured Nilfgaardian stallion with a high saddle with which he could see over the heads of his soldiers.
Colonel Barclay Els?
The dwarf nodded his plume and looked at the blood that covered the messenger and his mare. Aubry involuntarily blushed. It was the blood of a Nilfgaardian who one of the condottiere had cut down right next to him. He did not even draw his sword.
Trumpeter Aubry…
Son of Anzelm Aubry?
The eldest.
Ha! I know your father! What have you got for me from Natalis and Foltest trumpeter?
The centre formation is in the threat of a breakthrough the Constable commands you to move your men between Golden Pond and the bank of the Cholta… To support…
His next words were drowned out by an incredible din of shouting and neighing horses. Aubry realised how useless the orders he had brought were. How much these orders meant to Barclay Els to Julia Abatemarco to the dwarves with the banner with the crossed hammers who were besieged from all side by Nilfgaard.
I was delayed… he wailed. Ive arrived too late.
Pretty Kitty sputtered like a real cat. Barclay Els gritted his teeth.
No trumpeter he said. Nilfgaard has arrived too early.
Congratulations ladies and myself for a successful resection of the small intestine colon splenectomy and liver stitching. Take note of how long it took for us to remove the effects of what had been done to our patient in a split second in battle. I would recommend this material for philosophical reflection. Sew up the patient now Lady Shani.
But Ive never done it Mister Rusty!
You have to start sometime. Sew red with red yellow with yellow and white with white. And everything will be all right.
What did you say? Barclay Els said yanking his beard. What did you say eldest son of Anzelm Aubry? Do you think we are idle here? We are under attack by Nilfgaard! It is not our fault that the men from Brugge were attacked!
But the orders…
I dont give a shit about the orders!
If we do not close the gap he shouted over the noise the Black Ones will break through the front! They will break through the front! Opening our ranks Barclay! You must march there!
Well be slaughtered before we can leave the pond! Well die for nothing!
So what do you propose?
The dwarf furiously cursed took off his helmet and threw it on the ground. His eyes were wild terrible and bloodshot. Chiquita frightened by the roar pulled at the reins.
Fetch me Yarpen Zigrin and Dennis Cranmer! Hurry!
Two dwarves waded out of the bloodiest part of the battle; it was clear at first glance. Both were covered in blood. The chainmail of one had a deep cut that was sheered at a sharp angle. The other had his head bandaged with a cloth which was soaked in blood.
Are you alright Zigrin?
I wonder sighed the dwarf why everyone is asking me that?
Barclay turned and fixed his eyes on the Constables messenger.
This is the eldest son of Anzelm. The Constable and the King have commanded that we go to the front to help them. Make sure you keep your eyes open trumpeter. There will be something to look at.
The plague! Cursed Rusty backing away from the table waving his scalpel. Why? Damn it! Why must it be so?
No one answered. Marti Sodergren only spread her hands. Shani bowed her head and Iola sniffed.
The patient who had just died stared upwards his eyes were fixed and glassy.
Strike Kill! Kill these motherfuckers!
At the same pace! Barclay Els shouted. Walk the same way! Keep the ranks tight! Stay as a group! A group!
No one is going to believe me thought the trumpeter Aubry. When I tell people about this no one will believe me. The square is breaking out of a full siege… Surrounded on all sides by cavalry torn beaten and harassed… And this square progresses. Advancing at the same pace in close formation shield to shield. Advancing treading on corpses pushing themselves against the elite Ard Feainn division… They were advancing.
Keep pace! Walk the same way! Barclay Els shouted again. Hold the ranks! The song you whoresons the song! Our song! Forward for Mahakam!
From the throats of a thousand dwarves came the famous Mahakam song of war.
Hooouuu! Hooouuu! Hou
Wait fellows!
Soon you will go to hell!
This whorehouse will crumble
To its foundations!
Hooouuu! Hooouuu! Hou
Strike Free Company!
Between the huge roar of the dwarves like a thin blade of mercy emerged the acute soprano of Julia Abatemarco. The condottieri left the square and made a counterattack on the Nilfgaardian cavalry. It was a suicide action – for the mercenaries lacking the protection of the halberds pikes and shields of the dwarves were exposed to the power of the Nilfgaardians attack. The pounding yelling and the squealing of horses made the trumpeter Aubry instinctively curl up in his saddle. Something struck him in the back. He felt his mare become caught in the general crush and was inexorably dragged into the terrible carnage and confusion. He firmly grasped the hilt of his sword which suddenly seemed to him to be strangely slippery and cumbersome.
After a moment he was driven across the line of shields and started to chop and fight around him like a man possessed.
Again! He heeded the wild cry of Pretty Kitty. One more strike! Hold on boys! Kill kill! For coins as golden as the sun! To me Free Company!
A Nilfgaardian rider without a helmet and with the silver sun on his cloak broke in through the shields standing in his stirrups he hacked his axe into the dwarf who was not protected by a shield he then opened the head of another. Aubry turned in his saddle and cut horizontally. The Nilfgaardians head fell to the ground. At the same time the trumpeter received a blow to the head and fell from the saddle. The crowd of people around him prevented his immediate fall to the ground and for a few moments he hung between heaven and earth between the sides of two horses. Although he was full of fear he was not in pain for long. As soon as he hit the ground his skull was immediately crushed by hooves.
After sixty-five years when asked about those days about the Battle of Brenna about the square marching over corpses of friends and foes advancing towards Golden Pond the old woman smiled further wrinkling her face which was already wrinkled and dark as a prune.
Impatiently – or maybe just pretending impatience she waved her trembling bony hand which was twisted with arthritis.
Neither side she lisped could gain an advantage. We were in the middle and surrounded. They attacked us from all sides. We simply killed. They us and we them… khekhe-khh… They us and we them…
The old woman controlled her coughing with effort. The listeners who were closest saw her wipe away a tear that was making its way through her maze of wrinkles and old scars.
They were as brave as us she muttered. Khe-khe… And we were just as strong and stubborn and fierce as they. Us and them…
She paused. For a long time. The listeners urged her watching her smile at the memories with its glory. Smiling at the blurred faces of those who survived through the fog of forgetfulness. Those that could not been killed by liquor narcotics or tuberculosis.
We were equally brave ended Julia Abatemarco. Neither side was strong enough to be braver. But we… We remained braver one minute more than they.
Marti I beg you give us more of your wonderful magic! Just a little bit more! These fellows guts are unfortunately one big stew garnished with lots of chain mail rings! I cannot do anything if he keeps flopping around like a fish out of water! Shani damn it hold the clamp! Iola! Are you asleep dammit? Tighten! Squeeezze!
Iola breathing heavily swallowed saliva with effort. Im going to faint she thought. I cant stand it. I cant bear it any longer the smell the awful mixture of blood puke faeces urine intestinal contents sweat fear and death. I cannot endure it any longer the constant crying the howling the bloody slimy hands reaching towards me as if I was their salvation their refuge their lives… I cannot stand the nonsense what we are doing here. Because it is nonsense. On big huge meaningless nonsense. I cannot stand any more strain and fatigue. They continue to deliver more and more… I cannot stand it. I cannot stand it. Im going to throw up. To faint. I will be ridiculed…
Bandage! Swab! Clamp! Not here! Be careful what youre doing! If you make another mistake Ill smack you on your red head! Do you hear? Ill smack you on the head!
Great Melitele help me. Help me goddess.
Look! He is improving! Another clamp Priestess. Here clamp the vessel! Well done Iola keep it up! Marti wipe your eyes and face. And me too…
Where does this pain come from thought Constable John Natalis. What hurts me so much?
Oh.
He unclenched his fists.
Strike! Cried Kees van Lo waving his hands. Strike Lord Marshal! Their line permits! If we do not hesitate to strike we can break them! The Great Sun will crush them!
Menno Coehoorn bit his nails. He noticed that there were people watching him and quickly pulled his fingers out of his mouth.
Strike Kees van Lo repeated calmly. Nauzicaa is ready.
Nauzicaa must be Menno said brusquely. Daerlan also needs to be. Lord Faoiltiarna!
The commander of the Vrihedd brigade Isengrim Faoiltiarna called the Iron Wolf turned to the marshal his face was distorted by a terrible scar that extended across his forehead brow the bridge of his nose and to his cheek.
You will strike there Menno Coehoorn pointed his baton. There where the Temerian and Redanian lines come together. Right there.
The elf saluted. His disfigured face did not move even his great deep eyes did not change expression.
Our allies thought Menno. Our allies. We have fought together. Against a common enemy. But I do not understand these elves at all. They are so strange. So different.
Curious Rusty tried to wipe his face with his elbow but his elbow was also bloody. Iola hurried to his aid. Interesting said the surgeon the patient was stabbed with a pitchfork… one of the teeth pierced his heart oh look here. The cardiac chamber is breached the aorta is almost separated… But he was still breathing a little while ago. Here on the table. On the battlefield he was pierced through the heart and he lived still on my table…
You mean he died? Said a grim member of the cavalry. We were carrying him here in vain?
It is never in vain Rusty held his gaze. But you are right he has died. The patient has died. Take him away… damn! Come take a look girls!
Marti Iola and Shani bowed over the dead soldier. Rusty lifted the eyelids of the dead man.
Have you ever seen anything like that?
The three began to tremble.
Yes all three answered simultaneously. They looked at each other in amazement.
I have already seen it said Rusty. Hes a witcher. A mutant. That explains to us why he survived for so long… He was your comrade-in-arms? Or did you bring him here by chance?
He was our companion Sir Medic a second soldier a small man with a bandage head said gloomily. From our squadron as a volunteer. A master swordsman. His name was Coen.
Did you know he was a witcher?
We did. But he was a good friend.
Ah Rusty sighed looking at four soldiers bringing in another wounded in a bloodsoaked cloak. A young man judging by how thin he was. Thats too bad… Id like to do the autopsy on this respectable witcher. This would be a fine opportunity I could even write a dissertation I could take a look at his organs. But there is no time remove him from the table! Shani water. Marti disinfectant. Iola… Hey girl are you crying again? What is it this time…
Nothing Mister Rusty. It is nothing. I will be alright.
I feel lied to cheated robbed said Triss Merigold.
Nenneke did not answer for a long time she gazed from the terrace overlooking the temples garden where the priestesses and novices devoted themselves to the spring works.
You made a choice she said finally. You chose your path Triss. Your own destiny. Voluntarily. This is no time to grieve.
Nenneke the enchantress looked down. I cannot really tell you more that what I have said. Believe me and forgive me.
Who am I to forgive? What benefits will you receive from my forgiveness?
I can see Triss burst out your eyes looking at me! You and your priestesses. I can see their eyes asking me the question. What are you doing here sorceress? Why are you not there with Iola Eurneid Katje Myrrha? Jarre?
Youre exaggerating Triss.
The sorceress stared into the distance into the woods beyond the temples walls to the distant smoke of fires. Nenneke was silent thinking she too was far away. Where the war was raging and bloody. She thought of the girls sent there.
They Triss said refused me.
Nenneke was silent.
They refused me everything Triss repeated. So clever so reasonable so logical… How could I not believe them when they explained that there are important and less important issues and those that are less important should be given up without a second thought to sacrifice them for the more important without a shadow of grief? That it does not make sense to save people that you know and love because they are just individuals and the fate of these individuals are irrelevant to the fate of the world. That there is no sense for the struggle in defence of honour and ideals for they are empty concepts? That the real battle for the fate of the world is somewhere else and will be fought somewhere else? And I feel robbed. Robbed of the possibility of committing follies. I cannot go madly hurrying after Ciri to help her I cannot run like crazy to save Geralt and Yennefer. Not only that there is a war which you have sent your girls… A war that Jarre fled to and I am refused the possibility to even stand on a hill. To once again stand on a hill. Knowing this time Id made the right decision.
Everyone has their decisions and everyone has their hills Triss the priestess said quietly. Everyone. You cannot escape your own.
The entrance to the tent was busy. They brought another wounded soldier. Accompanied by several men. One of them a knight in full plate armour was shouting orders.
Hurry up you damn slackers! Faster! Put him here here! Hey you! Surgeon!
Im busy Rusty did not even look up. Please put him with the other wounded on the stretchers. Ill deal with him as soon as Im done.
Youll take care of him immediately you fucking quack! This is the noble Count of Garramone himself!
This hospital Rusty raised his voice angry because stuck in the bowels of a wounded man was the broken tip of a crossbow bolt which had slipped out of his tweezers has very little to do with democracy. You bring up mainly barons counts marquises and earls. The ordinary wounded on the battlefield nobody cares about. But everyone is equal here. At least on my table.
What?
Never mind Rusty said again probing the wound with his tweezers it doesnt matter if I was dragging a piece of metal from a serf or an aristocrat. All who lie on my table are equal to a beggar prince.
What?
Your Count must wait his turn.
Halfling fuck!
Help me Shani. Take the other clamp. Beware of the artery! Marti a little bit of magic if I may ask. We have a bleeder.
The knight took a step forward his armour and teeth gnashing.
Ill have you hanged! He shouted. Youll hang cursed non-human!
Shut up Papperbrock said the slightly wounded nobleman. Shut up leave me here and get back to the fight.
But my lord! I cannot…
Thats an order!
From the other side of the canvas came the roar and rattle of battle the snorting of horses and wild cries. The wounded in the hospital howled in different voices.
Please take a look Rusty raised the tweezers and demonstrated as he finally removed the tip. This was undoubtedly manufactured by a clever craftsman to feed a large family. It shows amazing skill and dexterity. The way this gizmo sticks in the human intestines is ingenious. Long live progress.
He threw the bloody tip into a bucket and looked at the operating table the wounded man had fainted dead away during his oration.
Sew him up and take him away he nodded. If he is lucky hell live. Bring me the next one in the queue. The one with the smashed head.
He Marti Sodergren said calmly has just released his place in line.
Rusty took a deep breath without unnecessary comment walked away from the table and stood by the hurt Earl. His hands and apron were splattered with blood like a butcher. Daniel Etcheverry Count of Garramone paled even more.
Well said Rusty. Its your turn Count. Lift him up onto the table. What have we here? Oh this joint can no longer be saved it is broken. If left it will grind your bones to mush.
Now this will hurt but dont worry it will be like in battle. Tourniquet scalpel saw. We will amputate my lord.
Daniel Etcheverry Earl of Garramone who until now had bravely endured the pain howled like a wolf. Before he could again clench his jaw Shani moving fast thrust a piece of soft wood between his teeth.
Your Majesty! Lord Constable!
Speak up boy.
The Volunteer army and the Free Company are nearing Golden Pond… The dwarves and the condottieri stand firm though with severe losses. It is said that Adam Adieu Pangratt is dead Frontino is dead and Julia Abatemarco is dead… All the commanders. The Dorian banner which were sent to help were cut down to the man…
Withdraw Lord Constable Foltest said quietly but clearly. If you ask me it is time to fight a withdrawal. Let Bronibors men stand against the Black Ones. Now! Immediately! Otherwise theyll break through the armys front line penetrate and end us all.
John Natalis didnt answer; he watched another messenger from afar who raced towards them on horseback from which foam flew.
Take a breath man. Take a breath and pass on the message.
They broke… They broke the front… Elves the Vrihedd brigade… Lord de Ruyter conveys a message to your lordships…
What is it? Speak!
It is time to save your lives.
John Natalis look up to the heavens.
Blenckert he said flatly. Let Blenckert arrive. Or let the night come.
From all sides hooves thundered around the tent the air was filled with screams and the whinnies of horses. A soldier burst into the hospital followed by two orderlies.
Run people! Shouted the soldier. Save yourselves! Nilfgaard has won! Defeat! Doom!
Clamp! Rusty said dodging blood that was spurting from the broken arteries of the patient on his operation table. Clamp! Swab! Here Shani! Marti do something about the bleeding…
Before the tent someone screamed like an animal. The scream trailed off to a grunt. A horse whinnied and something fell with a clang and a boom. A crossbow bolt ripped through the canvas whistling it flew to the opposite side of the tent luckily too high to threaten any of the wounded lying on litters.
Nilfgaard! The soldier shouted again in a high trembling voice. Surgeon! Did you not hear what I said! Nilfgaard has broken our lines and are killing everyone! Run!
Rusty took over from Marti Sodergren taking her needle and began to sew. The patient lay motionless for a long time but was still alive – his heart was beating. It was clearly visible.
I dont want to die! Shouted one of the wounded who were conscious. The soldier cursed and launched himself at the exit he suddenly fell back screaming splattering blood and collapsed to the ground. Iola who was kneeling beside the litter jumped back.
Suddenly there was silence.
This is bad Rusty thought when he saw who was entering the tent. Elves with silver lightning on their cloaks. The Vrihedd brigade. The notorious Vrihedd brigade.
They are being treated said the first of the elves tall with a narrow face and blue eyes.
No one answered. Rusty felt his hands shake. He quickly handed the needle to Marti. He saw Shani turn pale as chalk.
What is the meaning of this? Said the elf ominously. Why are there so many being treated? The wounded should be there in the field of battle dying of their wounds. And you are healing them here? It does not make sense. It appears that we have different interests.
He bent and drove his sword into the chest of a wounded soldier closest to the door. Another elf crossed to a second wounded man and put his sword through him. The third wounded man was conscious and tried to stop the deadly stabbing with the thickly bandaged stump of his right arm.
Shani screamed shrilly. It was a sharp cry that pierced. It drowned out the heavy inhuman grunt from the crippled man. Iola fell across a stretcher and used her own body to protect another wounded. Her face was as white as the canvas dressing. The Elfs eyes narrowed.
Va vort beanna! He snapped Get off or Ill stab you both Dhoine!
Get out of here! Rusty found himself with three jumps in front of Iola and stood between her and the elf. Get out of my hospital murderers! Out there you can kill each other! But get out of here!
The elf looked down. The small stocky halfling trembling in fear only reached just above his belt.
Blorde Pherian he hissed. Human slave! Get out of my way!
Not on your life! The surgeons teeth chattered but his words were strong.
A second elf ran forward and pushed the halfling aside with a spear. Rusty fell to his knees. The tall elf violent jerked Iola off of the wounded man and raised his sword.
He froze when he saw the black cloak rolled up under the casualtys head with the silver flames of Deithwen division on it. And the distinction of Colonel.
Yaevinn! An elf entering the tent shouted his dark hair collected in a braid. Caemm veloe! Essevgyriad adhoine aen va! Esstess!
The tall elf looked for a moment at the wounded colonel then at the watery eyes filled with fear of the surgeon. Then he turned on his heel and left.
From outside again came the sound of horses hooves pounding screaming and the clash of iron.
There are the Black Ones! Kill them! Shouted a thousand voices. Someone outside the tent again roared like an animal and then ended in a grunt.
Rusty tried to stand but his legs would not hear of it. His hands shook.
Iola shook with strong spasms of weeping curled up next to the stretcher of the wounded Nilfgaardian in a foetal position.
Shani was crying without trying to hide the tears but still held the clamps. Marti sewed quietly only her lips moved in a silent monologue.
Rusty was still unable to stand up. His eyes met the eyes of an orderly pressed into the corner of the tent.
Give me a sip of vodka he said with effort. Dont tell me you dont have any. I know you beasts always do.
General Blenheim Blenckert stood in his stirrups and stretched his neck as he listened to the echoes of battle.
Form up the troops he ordered. Then trot over the hill. From what the scouts are saying we will run directly into the right wing of the Black Ones.
Well give them hell! Cried one of the young lieutenants a youth with a thin silky beard. Blenckert gave him a side-long glance.
Bring the standard to the front he ordered and drew his sword. And give the battle cry Redania! with all the power in your lungs! Let Foltest and Nataliss boys know that the relief is here.
Count Kobus de Ruyter had fought many battles in the last forty years. He had fought them since his sixteenth year of life. De Ruyters had been soldiers for eight generations. The roar of battle the rattle and crash of steel that was unbearable for everyone Kobus de Ruyter perceived as a musical symphony. And at this moment he heard in the concert new notes chords and tones.
Hooray! He yelled waving his mace. Redania! Redania is coming! Eagles! Eagles!
Over the top of the hill from the north appeared riders. Above the head of the riders and horses fluttered a huge banner with the silver eagle of Redania.
Relief! Yelled de Ruyter. Here comes relief! Hooray! Strike at the Black Ones!
The soldier from eight generations of soldiers noticed that the Nilfgaardians were turning in a counterattack and were moving to tighten their formation. He knew that it must be avoided.
Follow me he ordered and grabbing the banner from the hands of the standard bearer. Follow me!
They attacked. They attacked like mad men in a terrible but effective way. They did not allow the Venendal division to form up against the Redanian cavalry. Their attack devastated the Nilfgaardians. The sky rocked with desperate screams.
Kobus de Ruyter never saw or heard. A stray crossbow bolt struck him directly in the head. The Count slipped from the saddle and fell from his horse; the standard he held covered him like a shroud.
Eight generations of de Ruyters who were following the battle from the other world nodded with appreciation.
You could say that the Nordlings were saved that day by a miracle. Or a cluster of coincidences that nobody has been able to provide… It is true that Restif de Montholon writes in his book that Marshal Coehoorn made a mistake in assessing the strength and intentions of the enemy. That he took too much of a risk splitting the Centre Group Army and taking only cavalry units to the north. That he plunged recklessly into a battle in which he had the upper hand. That his reconnaissance was underestimated and therefore did not know about the Redanian auxiliary army…
Cadet Puttkammer! The dubious works of Mister Montholon are not on the reading list of this school! And his imperial majesty has spoken out quite critically about this book! So cadet do not quote it here. Indeed I am surprised. So far your responses had been pretty good even excellent and suddenly you begin to clamour about miracles and clusters of circumstances to let you end allows you to criticize the military capabilities of Menno Coehoorn one of the greatest leaders of the Empire. Cadet Puttkammer and the other cadet if you want to pass the exam listen to me and remember – At Brenna there were no miracles or coincidences our defeat was caused by an extensive plot! Not only by hostile marauders but also by subversive elements within our own ranks – various malcontents cosmopolitans renegades and traitors! An abscess which later was burned with a white hot iron. But before that happened those nasty traitors betrayed their own nation and wove their webs and traps and built their networks. They tangled and betrayed Marshal Coehoorn then deceived and misled him! They were rogues without honour conscience or simple…
Motherfuckers wheezed Menno Coehoorn looking through his spyglass at the right wing. Cursed motherfuckers. Ill find you just wait and Ill teach you what it means to reconnoitre. De Wyngalt! Personally find the officer who was on patrol behind the hills to the north. And hang his entire patrol.
As you command Ouder de Wyngalt the Marshals aide clicked his heels. Of course he did not know that Lamarr Flaut the wanted commander from the reconnaissance patrol was now dying under the hooves of the Redanian cavalry whose arrival at the fight he did not identify because of his own cowardice. De Wyngalt obviously could not know that for himself there only remained two hours of life.
How many are their Sir Trahe said Coehoorn without taking his eye from the spyglass. According to your estimate?
About ten thousand the commander of the Seventh Daerlan replied dryly. Mainly Redania but I also see the banners of Aedirn… There is also a unicorn so Kaedwen as well… At least one squadron…
The Dun Banner galloped horses hooves kicking up sand and gravel.
Forward Dun Banner! Roared Centurion Digod drunk as usual. Kill kill! For Kaedwen! Kaedwen!
Damn but I want to piss Zyvik thought. I should have peed before the battle… Now there is no time.
Forward Dun Banner!
Always the Dun Banner. When things go wrong the Dun Banner. Who is sent as an expeditionary force to Temeria? The Dun Banner. Always the Dun Banner. And I want to piss.
They arrived. Zyvik screamed turned in his saddle and cut at an ear shattering the shoulder and neck of a rider in a black coat with a silver star with eight points.
The Dun Banner! Kaedwen! Attack attack!
With the pounding and crash of hooves and the scream of humans the Dun Banner collided with the Nilfgaardians.
De Mellis-Stoke and Braibant can handle this relief Elan Trahe the commander of the Seventh Daerlan brigade said calmly. The forces are balanced nothing can happen that cannot be fixed. The left wing is strengthened by Tyrconnels division and the right wing has Magne and Venendal. And we… we can tip the balance Lord Marshal…
We will strike the breach opened by the elves Coehoorn an experienced strategist said immediately. They will move over to the head and invoke panic. Yes thats what well do the Great Sun! To the banners gentlemen! Nauzicaa and Seventh your time has come!
Long live the Emperor! Kees van Lo yelled.
Mister de Wyngalt the Marshal turned away. Gather the attendants and the personal guard. It is the end of inactivity. Were going to attack together with the Seventh Daerlan.
Ouder de Wyngalt paled but immediately caught himself.
Long live the Emperor! He said his voice barely wavering.
Rusty cut the wounded screamed and clawed at the table. Iola fought bravely with the movements of his head tightening the tourniquet. From the entrance of the tent came the sound of Shanis raised voice.
What are you doing? Have you all gone mad? We are trying to save the living here and you come here dragging the dead?
But it is our own Baron Anzelm Aubry Lady Healer! The commander of the squadron!
He was the commander of the squadron! Now hes dead! Youve managed to bring him here in one piece only by the fact that his armour is tight! Take him away. This is a hospital not a graveyard!
But Lady Healer…
Do not block the entrance! Oh there carry in that one that still breathes. Or so it seems. Or maybe it is just gas.
Rusty snorted but then frowned.
Shani! Come here!
Remember brat Rusty said through clenched teeth leaning over crushed legs. Cynicism is only permitted to a surgeon after the first ten years of practice. Do you understand?
Yes Mister Rusty.
Take a scrapper and remove the periosteum… Damn we should anesthetize a bit… Where is Marti?
Puking at the front of tent Shani said without a hit of cynicism. Like a cat.
Sorceresses Rusty picked up a saw instead of thinking of various terrible and powerful spells they should focus on inventing one. So that they can cast it as a minor spell. For example the anaesthetic. Without the various problems and side effects like puking.
The saw grated on bone. The wounded soldier howled.
Tighten the tourniquet harder Iola!
The bone finally gave way. Rusty put away the saw and then wiped his sweaty forehead.
Veins and vessels he nodded out of habit but in vain because before he even finished the sentence the girls had already come over. He took the severed leg from the table and threw it in the corner on a pile of other severed limbs. The wounded man had not howled or screamed for some time.
Unconscious or dead?
Fainted Mister Rusty.
Great. Sew the stump Shani. Bring in the next one! Iola go and check if Marti has finished vomiting everything.
I am curious Iola said quietly without looking up how many years of experience do you have Mister Rusty. A hundred?
After several minutes of forced march that raised a cloud of dust the cries or the Decurions and Centurions finally stopped and the Vizima Regiment deployed into battle lines. Jarre panting and drinking in air like a fish saw Voivode Bronibor parading along the lines on his beautiful sorrel covered with armour plates the Voivode was also dressed in full armour and his armour was covered in blue though which made Bronibor look like a huge tin mackerel.
How are you soldiers? Bronibor shouted to his men.
The ranks of pikemen responded with a roar that echoed like distant thunder.
Youre making a lot of noise the Voivode said turning his horse and walking back down the line that means youre doing well. When youre not doing well you whine and moan like old ladies. I can see from your faces that you are dying to enter the battle that you dream to fight and cannot wait to take on the Nilfgaardians! Eh soldiers of Vizima? Then I have good news for you! Your dreams will be fulfilled in an instant. In a short moment.
The Pikemen murmured again. Bronibor meanwhile arrived at the end of the line turned his horse and slowly rode back. He spoke further and tapped his baton on his decorated saddle pommel.
You have swallowed dust infants marching behind the knights! Until now instead of glory and booty you have been smelling horseshit! You lack power and you almost did not reach the field of honour and glory even today slackers. But in the end you still manage to get my heartfelt congratulations. In this country whose name I have forgotten you can finally show your worth as soldiers. That cloud you seen in the field is the Nilfgaardian cavalry which aims to destroy our army by attacking the flank and pushing our forces into the swamp near the river whose name I have forgotten too. But you famous Vizima pikemen will defend the honour of King Foltest and Constable Natalis by filling in the gap created by our ranks. You will close the gap with your breasts halting the Nilfgaardians charge. Rejoice eh comrades? Are you bursting with pride?
Jarre squeezing the shaft of his pike looked around. Nothing pointed to the fact that the soldiers were happy with the prospect of the approaching fight and if they were proud of their task their pride was skilfully masked. Melfi who was to his right murmured a prayer to himself. To his left Deuslax an optimistic professional sucked up snot coughed and cursed to himself nervously.
Bronibor turned his horse and straightened in the saddle.
I did not hear you! He bellowed. I asked if you are fucking bursting with pride?
This time the pikemen seeing no other way out roared with a loud voice that they were proud. Jarre also roared. Just like everyone else.
Good! The Voivode turned his horse to face the army. Now rally! Centurions what are you waiting for? Form a square front row kneeling second row remain standing! Plant your pikes! Not by this side you idiot! Yes Im talking to you hairy bastard! Move closer shoulder to shoulder! Ah now you look terrific! Almost like you are an army!
Jarre found himself in the second row. He pressed the butt of the pike into the ground and gripped it in fear in his sweaty hands. Melfi dimly repeated several words that were mostly related to the intimate details of the life of the Nilfgaardians dogs bitches kings constables governors and all their mothers.
The cloud in the field approached.
Dont waste your farts or chattering teeth now! Bronibor cried. You cant use those noises to scare the Nilfgaardian horses! Let there be no mistake! Moving towards us is the Nauzicaa and Seventh Daerlan divisions an excellent well-trained army! They cannot be scared! They cannot be beat! You have to kill them! Raise those pikes higher!
From the distance came the sound of hooves still far away but growing louder. The earth began to shake. In the cloud of dust the sun sparkled off of flashing blades.
You are fucking lucky men of Vizima the Voivode shouted again. You are not using a normal pike but a new type which is twenty feet long! While the swords of the Nilfgaardians are only three and a half feet long. You know how to count? They know how to count too.
But they think that you will not hold and show your true nature the nature of a coward. The Black Ones are counting on those pikes hitting the ground and you men scurrying across the field like rabbits and then they can cut you down comfortably without complication.
Remember shitheads although fear can lend your feet speed you cannot outrun a horse. Those who want to live who want fame and booty will resist! Resist viciously! Resist like a wall! And keep the ranks!
Jarre looked around. The crossbowmen that were behind the line of pikemen were already turning their cranks within the square halberds javelins spears and pitchforks were being lifted. The ground shook harder still. They could make out the black wall of the cavalry rushing towards them and could make out individual riders.
Mama mama Melfi repeated with trembling lips. Mama mama…
…Fucking whoresons Deuslax murmured.
The rumbling increased. Jarre went to lick his lips but failed. His tongue had stopped moving it had become strangely stiff and was a dry as sawdust. The rumbling grew louder.
Get ready! Bronibor roared drawing his sword. Put your shoulder to your neighbour! None of you go to war alone! The only cure for the fear you feel is that pike in your hands! Ready for the battle! Put the pikes into the chest of the horse! What must we do soldiers of Vizima? That is a question?
Resist! The pikemen shouted in unison. Resist like a wall! Keep the ranks!
Jarre roared with everyone. From under the hooves of the approaching horses sprayed gravel and sand. The riders they carried howled like demons waving their swords.
Jarre held onto his pike hid his head on his shoulder and closed his eyes.
Jarre without interrupting his writing used the stump of his hand to wave away a wasp that was hovering over the inkwell.
Field Marshal Coehoorns plan failed – his counterattack against the flank was stopped by the heroic Vizima infantry and Voivode Bronibor even though they paid a bloody tax.
While the men of Vizima resisted the strong pressure from Nilfgaard on the left flank the enemy continued on the right. Soon our troops gained the upper hand on the right flank as well where the dwarves and tough condottiere resisted Nilfgaards grip. From our ranks arose a triumphant cry and in the hearts of our fighters enter a new spirit. The confidence of the Nilfgaardian soldiers fled their arms grew heavy and their strength ebbed. Some of them retreated others still resisted but now uncoordinated in scattered groups soon besieged from all sides.
Then the enemy commander realised that the battle was lost. Surrounded by his loyal officers and knights they brought him a new horse and pleaded with him to escape and save his life. But in the Field Marshals chest beat a brave heart.
It is not right he cried pushing away the reins being handed to him. Only a coward would flee from the field where the empire has lost so many good men.
Then brave Menno Coehoorn said…
There is no way to escape said Menno Coehoorn soberly looking around the battlefield. They have us surrounded.
Give me your coat and helmet sir. Captain Sievers wiped sweat and blood from his face. Take my things and horse… Do not protest! You must survive Lord Marshal. Your life your skills are too valuable for the empire irreplaceable… My Daerlan will hit the Nordlings they will be attracted to us and you can try to break out down there by the pond…
I shall leave Coehoorn muttered grabbing the reins given to him.
It is an honour Seivers stood up in the saddle. We are soldiers! Of the Seventh Daerlan!
Good luck Coehoorn murmured throwing a cloak with the silver scorpion around his shoulders. Seivers?
Yes Lord Marshal?
Nothing. Good luck kid.
You too sir. Behind me men!
Coehoorn stared after them for a long time until the point where Sievers group with screaming and the pounding of hooves collided with the condottieri. The condottieri outnumbered them and other units rushed in to help. The Black cloaks disappeared among the condottieri gray and everything was enveloped in dust.
A significant cough from de Wyngalt brought Field Marshal Coehoorn back to reality. He adjusted the harness and stirrups and mounted the stallion.
Lets go! He ordered.
At first they were fine. The Nordlings made a gap in their defences as they concentrated their forces on doggedly attacking the last division of soldiers who had survived the destruction of the Nauzicaa brigade. The Marshal made his way out of the encirclement but not without obstacles. The Nilfgaardians had to fight the light cavalry who according to their colours were from Brugge.
Coehoorn stopped pretending heroism he just wanted to survive. He looked back at his private guards struggling with the cavalry he rode hastily with his assistants towards the river flattening himself and clinging to his horses neck.
The way was clear on the other side of the river behind some bent willows was an empty plain were he could see no armies. Ouder de Wyngalt also saw this and shouted with triumph.
Too soon.
The slow lazy current of the steam was the only thing that separated them from the green field. They came at it at a full gallop after a couple of steps the horses sank up to their stomachs into a swamp.
The Marshal flew across the stallions head and landed in the mud. All around him horses and people screamed. Amidst the pandemonium Menno suddenly heard a different sound. A sound that signified death.
The sound of arrows.
He lunged towards the river. Cutting through deep mud. Beside him a wading aide fell on his face in the mud the Marshal saw an arrow in his back. At the same time he felt a hard blow to his head. He staggered but did not fall because he was up to mid-thigh in the marsh.
He wanted to scream but only managed to croak.
Im alive he thought with relief still alive. A horse who was trying to free itself from the clutches of the stick mud had kicked the Marshals helmet smashing the plate and cutting his cheek smashing his teeth and slashing his tongue… Im bleeding… I can taste blood… But Im alive…
Again he heard the sound of a bow the whistle of arrows and the crack of thunder as the bolts pierced through armour the shouting the neighing of horses and the splash of blood.
The Marshal looked back and saw at the edge of the shooters small stock squat figures in chainmail and helmets. Dwarves he thought.
The sound of ropes from the crossbows the whistle of bolts. The neighing of terrified horses. The sound of screaming form people trapped in the mud and water.
Ouder de Wyngalt turned towards the shooters and called to surrender in a high squeaky voice he begged for mercy and offered ransom. He grabbed his sword by the blade the internationally known gesture and held it towards the dwarves. The gesture was not understood or wrongly understood – two arrows hit him in the chest so hard that the impact almost lifted him out of the mud.
Coehoorn ripped the damaged helmet from his head. He knew the Nordling language well enough.
Mmmenno… Coehoorn… He stammered spitting blood. Mmarshal… Coehoorn…
What is he spluttering Zoltan? One of the dwarves wondered aloud.
Who cares fuck this dog and his chatter! See the embroidery on his cloak Munro?
A silver scorpion! Haaa! Guys nail the motherfucker! For Caleb Stratton!
For Caleb!
The strings rang. Coehoorn received one arrow in his chest one in the groin and one below the collar bone.
The Nilfgaardian Field Marshal fell back into the slush knotweed and pondweed and disappeared under the weight of his armour.
Who the devil is Caleb Stratton he thought Ive never even heard of Caleb…
Turbid water dense with blood and mud from the Cholta River closed over his head and into his lungs.
She left the tent to get some fresh air. Then she saw him sitting next to the blacksmiths bench.
Jarre?
He raised his eyes. In them was a void.
Iola he said with difficulty his lips swollen. How are you…?
What a question! She immediately interrupted him. A better question is how did you get here?
We brought our commander… Voivode Bronibor… Hes hurt…
But so are you! Show me your hand! Goddess! Youre bleeding to death!
Jarre stared at her but Iola suddenly began to wonder if he was seeing anything.
There was a battle said the boy his teeth chattering. We must stand like a wall… firmly in the ranks… It was easier to carry the wounded to a military hospital… The severely wounded. Orders.
Show me your hand.
Jarre gave a short cry his teeth chatter as if in fever. Iola frowned.
It looks bad… Jarre Jarre… Mother Nenneke will be angry… Come with me.
She saw him pale when he entered the tent. When he smelt the stench. He staggered. She steadied him. She saw him staring at the bloody table. At the man who lay there. At the surgeon the little halfling who jumped suddenly stomped his feet cursed swore and hurled his scalpel to the ground.
What the hell! Fuck! Why? Why?
Nobody answered the question.
Who was that?
Voivode Bronibor Jarre said in a weak voice looking straight ahead his eyes blank. Our commander… We stood in firm ranks. Order. Like a wall. And Melfi killed…
Mister Rusty Iola said. This man is a friend of mine… He is hurt…
He is still on his feet the surgeon said coolly. And this is expecting a trepanation. There is no room for favouritism…
At this point Jarre with great sensitivity dramatically fainted and fell to the floor. The halfling snorted irritably.
Well well get him on the table he commanded. Ah his hand. I wonder what is holding it on? Probably his sleeve. Iola tourniquet. Harder! Do not dare cry here! Shani give me the saw!
With a sickening screech the saw bit into the crushed bones of the elbow joint. Jarre woke up and shouted. Awfully shrilly – but briefly. Once the bone gave way he immediately fainted again.
And so the power of Nilfgaard lay in the dirt and dust of the fields of Brenna and the march north by the Empire was laid to an end. The losses for the Empire amounted to forty thousand killed and captured men. The foundation of Elite Knights fell. They died in captivity or went missing without a trace like such as the leaders Menno Coehoorn Braibant de Mellis-Stoke van Lo Tyrconnel Eggebracht and others whose names have not been preserved in our archives.
Brenna was indeed the beginning of the end. But it is worth writing that this battle would have been a small stone in the building and its importance would have been small if the fruits of victory had not been used wisely. Constable John Natalis did not rest on his laurels but immediately went to the south. An unexpected counterattack led by Adam Pangratt and Julia Abatemarco surprised two divisions of the Third Army which were running late to relieve Coehoorn and were routed nec nuntius cladis. At this news the rest of the Centre Group Army crossed shamefully back over the Yaruga and escaped in a hurry and Foltest and Natalis followed on their heels. The Imperials lost their baggage train and all their siege engines which they planned to use to conquer Vizima Gors Velen and Novigrad.
Like an avalanche rolling down from the mountains into the valley that collects more and more snow and gains power so did the consequences of the Battle of Brenna provide more damage to the Nilfgaardians. The Verden Group Army was heavily afflicted by pirate raids and attacks from Skellige and King Ethain from Cidaris. When Commander Duke de Wett learned of the disaster at Brenna and the news reached him that Foltest and John Natalis had ordered a forced march he immediately sounded a retreat and in panic fled across the river to Cintra and escaping with significant losses to his troops because word had gotten around about Nilfgaards defeat and a new rebellion was rising in force in Verden. Only troops remained in the forts of Nastrog Rozrog and Bodrog and after the Peace of Cintra they emerged with honour with banners aloft.
Meanwhile in Aedirn the news of what happened at Brenna caused the antagonised Kings Demavend and Henselt to join together in arms against Nilfgaards East Group Army which was led by Duke Ardal aep Dahy into the Pontar valley and unable to resist the combined forces of the two kings. With the addition of the strength of the troops from Redania and the guerrilla squads of Queen Meve who undertook combat actions in the rear of the enemy they forced Nilfgaard to Aldersberg. Ardal aep Dahy prepared for battle but due to fate he suddenly became serious ill perhaps from spoiled food. He got colic and diarrhoea and two days later died in pain. Demavend and Henselt without waiting launched an attack against Nilfgaard in Aldersberg surely because of historical justice Nilfgaard suffered a heavy defeat though they still had numerical superiority. But daring spirit and technique won out over blind brute force.
It is necessary to mention one other thing – namely that it is still unknown what happened at Brenna to Menno Coehoorn. Some believe that he fell with his soldiers and his remains unrecognised were laid to rest in a common grave. Others speculate that he escaped but from fear of the Imperial wrath never returned to Nilfgaard but instead resorted to the Dryads in Brokilon and became a hermit in the forest. In remorse he lived for years in seclusion and separation and eventually died.
Among ordinary people circulated the rumour that the famous Marshal in the night after the battle returned to the field at Brenna and could not stand looking at the tragedy and hanged himself from a aspen on a hill which from that time on was called Gallows. At night it is said that his spirit wanders the battle field lamenting and crying out Give me back my legions!.
Grandpa Jarre! Grandpa Jarre!
Jarre looked up from the paper and pushed his glasses further up on his nose.
Grandpa Jarre! Screamed the high pitched voice of his youngest granddaughter a bright and lively six year old who thank the gods looked like her mother Jarres daughter and not his son-in-law.
Grandpa Jarre! Granma Lucienne told me to tell you that is enough writing for today and that dinner is on the table!
Jarre carefully placed the reams of paper and put the cork into the inkwell. The stump of his hand throbbed with pain. The weather is changing he thought its going to rain.
Grandpa Jarreeeeee!
Im coming Ciri. Im coming.
Before he was finished with the last of the wounded it was already past midnight. The last operation was performed under artificial light - lamps candles and also magic. Marti Sodergren regained consciousness after overcoming her crisis and though deadly pale stiff and unnatural in her movements like a golem she effectively performed spells.
It was dark when they left the tent the four of them laid flat on some canvas. The meadow was full of fires. Various fires - fires of campers unstable fires torches and firebrands. Through the night sounds resounded through the air shouting matches singing chanting and cheering.
The night was alive around them too with disjointed cries and the groans of the wounded. Supplications and sighs of the dying. They did not hear any of it. They were used to the sounds of suffering and dying to them the sounds were ordinary natural and blended into the night with the croaking of the frogs in the marshes by the River Cholta or the cicadas chirping by Golden Pond.
Marti Sodergren was silent leaning on the shoulder of the halfling. Iola and Shani hugging tightly occasionally issued a laugh at something completely stupid. They all sat next to the tent each drank a glass of vodka and Marti delighted everyone with one last spell -an intoxicating spell usually used for tooth extraction.
Rusty felt cheated. The treatment - the drink that was bound by magic rather than relax him or reducing his weariness intensified it. Instead of granting oblivion it reminded him. It seemed that the magical alcohol affected only Iola and Shani as it should.
He turned and saw the moonlight on the faces of the two girls bright and silvery with tears.
I wonder he said licking his dry and callous lips who has won the battle. Does anyone know?
Marti turned to face him but remained silent.
The cicadas sang among the willows and alders by the pond the frogs croaked the wounded wailed prayed and sighed. And died. Iola and Shani laughed amongst their tears.
Marti Sodergren died two weeks after the battle. She had an affair with an officer of the condottieri Free Company. She tried this adventure as something temporary. Unlike the officer. When Marti who liked changes became involved with a cavalry officer the condottiere mad with jealousy stabbed her. He hung for it but they were unable to save the healer.
Rusty and Iola died a year after the battle in Maribor the biggest explosion of the epidemic haemorrhagic fever also known as the Scarlet Death or - from the name of the ship which it was imported from - The Catriona Plague.
All the doctors and most of the priests hurried to Maribor along with Rusty and Iola. To heal because they were doctors. The fact that there was no cure for the Scarlet Death did not matter to them. Both were infected. He died in her arms the strong confident grip of her large ugly peasant hands. She died four days later. Alone.
Shani died seventy-two years after the battle as a famous and respected retired professor of medicine at the University of Oxenfurt. Future generations of surgeons repeated her famous quote - Sew red with red yellow with yellow and white with white. And everything will be all right.
Hardly anyone noticed after delivering this quote she always secretly wiped away tears.
Hardly anyone.
Frogs croaked cicadas buzzed Iola and Shani giggled and cried.
I wonder repeated Milo Vanderbeck a halfling a field surgeon known as Rusty. I wonder who won the battle?
Rusty said Marti Sodergren. This is really the last thing Id be interested in your place.
Some of the flames were high and strong shining brightly and vividly while others were small shaky and trembling and the flames darkened and they sank. At the end of the row was a tiny flame one so weak that it was barely smouldering barely alight and then it shimmered with great effort and almost extinguished.
Whose is that dying light? Asked the witcher.
Yours said Death.
Flourens Delannoy
Fairytales and Stories
CHAPTER NINE
The plateau whose far end was bathed in fog at the foot of a giant mountain resembled a stone sea. It rippled forming mounds and curling crests that looked like the sharp teeth of a reef. The wreckages of ships contributed to that feeling. There were dozens of wrecks. The remnants of galleys caravels and longships. Some gave the impression of only being here a short time while others were no more than a few piles of boards and ribs and were hardly recognisable and had certainly been there for decades if not centuries.
Some ships were overturned and others were tipped on their sides and looked like they had been washed here by an immense storm or hurricane. Other ships gave the impression that they were still sailing the ocean. They stood straight wedged between rocks their masts towered proudly into the sky and the spars still flapped with ragged sails. They even had a ghostly crew – stuck in the rotten planks and tangled in the ropes were skeletons of dead sailors sentenced to an eternal voyage.
Alarmed by the appearance of a rider and frightened by the sound of pounding hooves from the masts yards ropes and skeletons broke swarms of black birds cawing. The flock circled for a moment over the edge of the abyss at the bottom of which lay a lake gray and smooth as mercury. On the cliff towering over the plain of wrecks half hanging over the lake embedded in cliff was a dark gloomy castle.
Kelpie recoiled snorted laid her ears back and looked suspiciously at the remains of the ships skeleton and the whole landscape of death. The black birds had returned and once again settled on the broken masts spars bones skulls and broken decks. The birds knew that they did not need to worry about one lone rider.
Easy Kelpie Ciri said. This is the end of the road. This is the right place and the right time.
She appeared before the walls from nowhere as if the wind blew her from the plain of ghostly wrecks. The sentries standing guard at the gate were the first to detect her presence alerted by the cries of the jackdaws. Now they were shouting and gesticulating pointing their fingers and calling to their comrades.
When she arrived at the gate there was already a crowd. Everyone stared down at her – the few who knew her or had seen her before like Boreas Mun and Dacre Silifant were greatly outnumbered by those who had only heard about her those newly recruited by Skellen; mercenaries and common ravagers from Ebbing and the surrounding areas who now looked down in amazement at the girl with the scar on her face and the sword on her back.
The beautiful black mare raised its head high snorting and restlessly ringing its shoes on the cobblestones of the courtyard.
The murmuring ceased. There was almost complete silence. The mare lifted her legs like a dancer; her shoes rang like a hammer on an anvil. It took a long time before the men crossed their path. One of them with a hesitant and frightened movement reached out to grasp the reins. The mare snorted.
Take me the girl said loudly to the master of this castle.
Boreas Mun himself did not know why he did it but he held her stirrup and offered his arm. The other men held the snorting and struggling mare.
Do you recognise me maiden? Boreas said quietly. We have met.
Where?
On the ice.
She looked him directly in the eyes.
I did not notice your faces she said impassively.
You were the Lady of the Lake he nodded his head very seriously. Why have you come here girl?
Why? For Yennefer. And my destiny.
Rather for your death he whispered. This is the castle Stygga. In your place I would quickly flee. Perhaps there is still time.
She looked at him again. Boreas realised what that look meant.
Stefan Skellen appeared. He looked at the girl for a long time with his arms crossed.
Finally he gestured vigorously for her to follow him. She went without a word escorted on all sides my armed men.
A strange girl Boreas said through clenched teeth shivering.
Fortunately shes not our problem Dacre Silifant said scathingly. Im surprised you talked to her. That witch killed Vargas and Fripp and Ola Harsheim…
The Owl killed Ola Harsheim Boreas cut him off not her. She spared our lives on the ice but she could have slaughtered us all like puppies. All of us. Even the Owl.
Look at her Dacre spat on the cobblestones. Shell be rewarded for her mercy by the sorcerer and Bonhart. Youll see Boreas what theyll do to her. Remove all her skin while she is alive in thin strips.
Thats certain Boreas grumbled. Because they are scoundrels. And we are no better because we are in their service.
Did we have any other choice? No.
Suddenly one of Skellens mercenaries screamed then another. Someone cursed and sighed. Another pointed silently.
On the battlements the corbels the roofs towers parapets gutters and gargoyles were covered as far as the eye could see in black birds. Quietly without a squawk they came from the wrecked shipyard and now quietly without a sound sat and waited.
They sense death muttered one of the mercenaries.
And carrion added another.
We had no choice Silifant repeated mechanically looking at Boreas.
Boreas looked at the birds.
Maybe its time he replied quietly to find one.
They climbed a wide stair case with three landings passing a row of statues set in niches along a corridor past a gallery and that surrounded a hall. Ciri walked boldly without fear neither frightened by the weapons or the escort. She lied when she said she did not remember the faces of the people from the frozen lake. She remembered. She remembered how Stefan Skellen the one who was now leading her through the gloomy corridors of the castle shivered and chattered his teeth on the ice.
Now when he looked back at her his eyes searing she felt that he was still afraid. She sighed with relief.
They entered a hall high pillars supported the ribbed vault and large chandeliers hung from the roof like giant spiders. Ciri saw who was waiting there for her Fear dug into her bowls like an iceberg clenching it into a fist and twisting.
Bonhart in three steps was in front of her. With both hands he grabbed her blouse lifted her off the ground and pulled her in tightly before his pale fish eyes.
Hell he wheezed must be really terrible if you prefer me.
She did not answer. She smelt alcohol on his breath.
Or maybe hell did not want you you little beast. The devils tower spit you out in disgust after tasting your poison.
He pulled her closer. She turned away from his face in disgust.
Youre afraid he gurgled. Rightly afraid. Here is the end of your journey. Youll not get away. Here in this castle we will release the blood from your veins.
Finished Mister Bonhart?
She immediately recognised the voice that spoke. It was Vilgefortz the wizard with whom she had met twice on the island of Thanedd. The first time while he was a prisoner in chains and again when he followed her to the Tower of Gulls. Then on the island he had been very handsome. Now his face had changed something had made him deformed and awful.
Excuse me Mister Bonhart the sorcerer did not move from his throne-like chair it is I the lord of castle Stygga who should assume the pleasant task of welcoming our guest the maiden Cirilla of Cintra Pavettas daughter Calanthes granddaughter and descendant of Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal. Be welcome. Come closer please.
The last words were not spoken under a mask of courtesy and ridicule. They were only threat and order. Ciri immediately felt that she would not be able to resist this command. She felt fear. Terrible fear.
Closer hissed Vilgefortz.
Now she could see what had happened to his face. The left eye was significantly smaller than the right blinking and squinting in a wrinkled eye socket. His gaze was terrible.
The posture of the brave with a trace of fear in her face the wizard said cocking his head. You have my appreciation. If your courage does not come from stupidity. Immediately dispel any fantasies. As Bonhart has said there is no escape. Either by teleport or with your special abilities.
She knew he was right. Earlier she had told herself that even in the last moment she could run and hide among the times and places. Now she knew that this hope was just an illusion a fantasy. The castle vibrated with hostile alien magic magic that penetrated her like a parasite crawling in her belly and her brain. There was nothing she could do. She was in the enemys hands. Powerless.
It cannot be helped she thought I knew what I was doing. I knew why I had to come here. The other reasons were just false hope. Whatever will happen will happen.
Good said Vilgefortz. A proper assessment of the situation. Whatever will happen will happen. More precisely – It will be as I decide. I wonder if you can guess what I will decide.
She tried to answer but before she could overcome the resistance in her shrunken and dried throat Vilgefortz probed her thoughts and again and interrupted. Of course you do Lady of the Worlds. Lady of time and space. Yes yes my wonderful I am not surprised by your visit. I know where you ran away to from the lake and know what you have done. I know how you got here. The only thing I dont know is if your journey was long. Or the number of experiences delivered.
Again with a malicious smile her cut her off.
Oh no need to respond. I know it was very interesting and exciting. Im anxious to try it also. You do not know how I envy that talent of yours. Ill need you to share it with me my wonderful. Yes need is the right word. Until you share with me your talent I will not let you out of my hands.
Ciri finally realised that it was not only fear gripping her throat. The sorcerer magically throttled and strangled her. He mocked her and humiliated her before the eyes of his followers.
Free… Yennefer she managed to get out coughing with the effort. Free her… And you can do whatever you want with me.
Bonhart burst out laughing Stefan Skellen also started to laugh dryly. Vilgefortz poke at the corner of his macabre eye with his little finger.
You cannot be so foolish as to think that and so you will do what I want. Your offer is pathetic so pathetic and ridiculous.
You need me… She lifted her head though it cost her a lot of strength. To have a child with me. Everybody wants that you do too. Yes I am in your power I came here on my own… You did not catch me though you chased me halfway around the world. I came here on my own and I give myself to you. For Yennefer. For her life. Does this seem ridiculous? Then try to take me by force take me the hard way… Youll see how fast you lose the urge to laugh.
Bonhart stood beside her in a jump threatening her with a whip. Vilgefortz nodded almost imperceptibly and slightly movement of his hand but it was enough to knock the whip from the hand of the bounty hunter and he stumbled like he had been hit by a wagon full of coal.
Mister Bonhart Vilgefortz said rubbing his fingers. I noticed you still have difficulty adapting to the duties of being my guest. Try to remember that my guests may destroy furniture and artwork steal small valuables and dirty the carpets and facility chambers. They cannot beat or rape other guests. The last at least until the host has finished beating and raping and signs that you can begin. From what Ive just said you should be able to draw the right conclusions. As to you Ciri Ill help you. You delivered yourself to me humbly and think that Ill do everything you please. And you think this is an extremely generous offer. You are wrong because it is I who will do what I please with you. For example I would by way of revenge for Thanedd like to take at least one of your eyes but I cannot because Im afraid that you would not survive.
Now or never Ciri thought. She turned around and drew her sword Swallow. Suddenly the whole room began to spin she fell and badly hit her knees. She lowered her forehead almost touching the floor struggling with the emetic reflex. The sword slipped from her numb fingers.
Someone picked it up.
Now Vilgefortz drawled leaning his chin on his folded hands as if in prayer. Where was I? Oh yes right your offer. Life and freedom for your Yennefer… For what? For your voluntary surrender willingly without violence and coercion? Im sorry Ciri. What I need to do to you without violence and coercion I simply cannot do.
He watched with interest as the girl coughed wheezed and spat thick saliva to prevent vomiting.
Yes yes he continued. Thats what Ill do with you youll never surrender willingly I assure you. And that is why your offer is not only pathetic and ridiculous but also worthless. For this reason I reject it. Grab her and take her to the lab!
The Laboratory was not much different from the one that Ciri knew of at the temple of Melitele in Ellander. It was brightly lit clean equipped with long tables with metal plates and shelves full of glass – flasks test tubes retorts bowls and all sorts of other gadgets.
As in Ellander it also smelled strongly of alcohol ether formalin and something else something that inspired terror. Even there in the friendly temple opposite the friendly priestess Nenneke and Yennefer Ciri felt fear in the laboratory. And there in Ellander no one dragged her into the lab by violence; nobody held her arms in an iron grip. There in Ellander was no steel chair whose shape was sadistically quite obvious. There were no white-dressed and clean-shaven-headed types no Bonhart no Skellen excitedly licking his lips. Nor were there Vilgefortz with one good eye and one unnaturally small and terribly busy.
Vilgefortz turned away from the table where he had been arranging terrible instruments for a long time.
You see my wonderful he began approaching her you are for me the key to power and dominance. Not only in this world which is doomed anyway but over all worlds. Over the myriad of places and times that arose after the conjunction. Surely you understand because you yourself visited some of these places and times.
Slowly he rolled up his sleeves and continued.
Im ashamed to admit but Im terribly attracted to power. Its trivial I know but I want to be a ruler. A Sovereign before whom all will fall on their faces and glorify him only because he exists and worship as a god if he deign to save their world from destruction – even if it is done on a whim. Oh Ciri my heart rejoices when I think about how I will generously reward the faithful and how I will cruelly punish the disobedient and rebellious. Whole generations will pray to me and beg me for pardon mercy and forgiveness. Generations of whole worlds.
Listen Ciri. Do you hear those prayers? Protect us from famine plague fire was and your wrath O Almighty Vilgefortz…
He wiggled his fingers in front of her eyes and suddenly grabbed her face violently. Ciri cried out and tried to escape but he held her firmly. Her lips trembled. Vilgefortz saw this.
Child of Destiny he laughed and from the corners of his mouth dripped foam. Aen Hen Ichaer the Elder Blood… is now all mine!
He straightened abruptly and wiped his mouth.
Fools and mystics he said in his usual calm tone tried to find the secret of your existence in ancient legends and prophecies in your genealogy they searched for the origins of your gene – a legacy of their ancestors. They have confused the night sky with the stars reflected on the surface of the water. The mystics believed that the gene would continue to develop thanks to the evolution of new possibilities and achieve greater power in your child or in your childs child. And around you grew a magical aura enveloping you in clouds of smoke from incense. They truth is however trivial one might say organic – the important thing here is your blood. But in the literal sense not the figurative sense of the word.
He raised a glass syringe from the table about a half foot long. It ended in a thin slightly curved point. Ciri felt her mouth go dry. The sorcerer examined the instrument in the light of a lamp.
My assistants will help you undress and get you settled in the chair… Yes that chair which you have been so curiously eyeing. You will have to remain for sometime in a rather uncomfortable position until I use this tool to inseminate you. It will not be so bad during the whole procedure youll be under the influence of powerful elixirs that I will be injecting to ensure the proper implantation of the egg and to prevent an ectopic pregnancy. Dont worry Ive had experience Ive done it a hundred times. You may be a child of the Elder Blood but I do not suppose that your fallopian tubes are somehow anatomically different from the tubes of ordinary girls.
Vilgefortz talked and talked obviously relishing in his own words.
And now for the most important thing you may be upset you may be happy but know that your child will not be born. Who knows maybe it would have been a great chosen one with extraordinary abilities the saviour of the world and the king of all the nations. However no one can guarantee this and besides I do not intent to wait that long. I need blood. More specifically placental blood. Once you have developed a placenta Ill remove it. The rest of my plans and intentions as you can understand do not concern you so there is no use in giving you useless information.
He made a theatrical pause. Ciri could not stop her lips from trembling.
And now the wizard gestured with a flourish I invite you to your chair princess.
It would be worth it Bonhart sneered under his grey moustache to see the look on that bitch Yennefers face. She deserves it.
Of course Vilgefortz wiped bubbly foam from his lips again. Fertilization is a sacred noble and solemn affair in which the family should assist. And Yennefer is something like a mother to her. In all primitive cultures mothers of the bride are present at this ritual. Quickly bring Yennefer here!
With regard to the fertilization Bonhart said bending over Ciri who the sorcerers minions had already started to undress would it not be possible to do it the old proven way Lord Vilgefortz? In accordance with nature?
Skellen snorted and shook his head. Vilgefortz frowned.
No he said frostily. It is not Bonhart.
Ciri as if only now realising the seriousness of the situation cried shrilly. Once twice.
Well well the sorcerer clicked. With head held high and a direct gaze you entered the lions den my dear and now you are afraid of a thin glass tube. Thats a shame.
Ciri ignored his admonitions and screamed until the laboratory glassware rattled.
And suddenly the whole of castle Stygga responded with cries of alarm.
Woe to us said Zadarlik scrapping a spear through the manure between the stones in the courtyard. Woe woe.
He looked at his companions but none of the guards were saying anything. Nor was Boreas Mun who had stayed with the guards at the gate. By his own will because he had not been ordered to stay. He could have gone with the Owl like Silifant could have seen with his own eyes what was going to happen to the Lady of the Lake and what fate awaited her. But he preferred to stay in the yard in the open away from the rooms and halls of the keep where they had led the girl. He was sure her screams wouldnt reach here.
Those black birds are an evil sign Zadarlik pointed to the jackdaws sitting on the walls and roofs. I get a bad feeling from the girl who came in on the black mare. This is ugly business serving the Owl I tell you. Rumour has it that the Owl is no longer the imperial coroner but an outlaw like us. That the Emperor has sentenced him to death. And when he is picked up woe to all who are with him. Woe to us.
Ay ay said a second guard a bearded man in a hat decorated with feathers. The stake awaits us! Not even the gods can stand before the imperial wrath.
Do not worry a third guard casually waved his hand who had only come to castle Stygga recently with the last group of mercenaries. The Emperor will not care about us he has other worries. There is talk of a battle somewhere in the north. The Nordlings killed the Imperials bled them properly.
In such a case said another it is good after all that we hold to the sorcerer and the Owl. Our kind are always better off with someone who has the upper hand.
Sure said the newcomer. The Owl is the future. And well go up with him.
You idiot said Zadarlik. Do you have sawdust in your head?
The black birds took flight. The flapping and squawking were deafening. They darkened the sky and began to circle the castle.
What the devil? Yelled one of the guards.
Open the gate please.
Boreas Mun suddenly noticed a strong smell of herbs – mint sage and thyme. He swallowed and shook his head. He closed his eyes and opened them again. In vain. A skinny man who looked like grizzled-looking tax collector stood by his side and did not disappear.
He stood smiling with his mouth closed. Boreas felt his hair standing on end nearly lifting his cap.
Open the gate please repeated the smiling man. Immediately. Believe me; it will be better for you.
Zadarlik dropped his spear which clattered on the ground. He stood frozen his lips moving wordlessly. His eyes were empty. The others headed for the gate. They walked like unnaturally stiff puppets. They lifted the latch and opened both doors. Into the courtyard rode four riders.
One had hair as white as driven snow and a sword in his hands which flickered like lightning. Behind him rode a blonde woman who was drawing a bowstring. The third was a pretty young girl with a crooked sabre with which she slashed at Zadarlik.
Boreas Mun picked up the dropped spear and raised it over his head. The fourth horseman loomed over him like a mountain. On his helmet stretched the wings of a bird of prey. His raised sword glistened.
Leave him Cahir the white-haired man said sharply. Save time and blood. Milva Regis this way…
No not that way Boreas said not knowing why he did so. Not that way… That way leads to a blind barbican. You have to go up the stairs to the top of the castle. If you want to save the Lady of the Lake… You must hurry…
Thank you said the white-haired man. Thank you stranger. Regis did you hear? Lead the way!
After a moment there were just dead bodies in the courtyard. And Boreas Mun still leaning on his spear. He could not release it. His legs were trembling. The jackdaws circling above castle Stygga were squawking and enveloped the towers and bastions like a black cloud.
Vilgefortz listened to the report of the mercenary who had rushed in breathlessly with a stoic and calm face. But his restless and blinking eye betrayed him.
Coming to her aid in the last minute he said grinding his teeth I do not believe it. These things do not happen. Or only come to pass in bad plays in little theatres. Make me happy my good man; tell me it is all a joke.
I have not made any thing up the mercenary said indignantly. Im telling the truth! A few people have broken… A whole gang…
Okay okay the wizard interrupted. It was a joke. Skellen personally take care of this matter. You will have the opportunity to show me how much your army is really worth that you hired with my gold.
The Owl jumped up and waved his arms nervously.
Do not take this lightly Vilgefortz he shouted. It seems you do not understand what threatens us! If someone is attacking the castle they can only be Emhyrs people! And that means…
It does not mean anything the sorcerer did not let him finish. But I know what youre doing. If my presence gives you courage then you can stand behind my back. Lets go! That goes for you too Bonhart!
Then he turned his terrible eyes on Ciri.
As for you forget your pointless hope. I know well who has so unexpectedly appeared in a theatrical attempt to save you. I assure you that I will convert this farce into a scene of horror. Hey you! He motioned for one of his minions. Put the girl in dimeritium shut her in a cell with three bolts and do not open the door. Or it is your head. Got it?
As you command my Lord.
They entered a corridor the corridor came to a large room filled with sculptures a real lapidarium. Nobody was in the room apart from a few servants that fled at the sight of them.
They race down a flight of stairs. Cahir kicked down a door. Angoulême burst into the room with a war cry her sabre knocking the helmet from an empty suit of armour that she had taken for a sentry by the door. When she realised her mistake she broke out laughing.
Heh heh heh. Look…
Angoulême! Geralt shouted. Dont just stand there! Continue!
Opposite them was a door beyond which they perceived silhouettes. Milva without thinking twice tensed her bow and shot an arrow. Someone screamed and the door crashed shut. Geralt heard the sound of a bolt sliding home.
Come on come on! He shouted. There is no time to waste!
Witcher Regis said. It makes no sense in running around blindly. Ill… Ill make a reconnaissance flight.
Fly.
The vampire disappeared as if the wind had carried him away. Geralt had no time to marvel.
Again they met men armed this time. Cahir and Angoulême rushed towards them shouting but their opponents ran. More than anything it seemed thanks to Cahirs imposing winged helmet.
They ran into a gallery surrounding an inner lobby. The door on the opposite side of the gallery was scarcely twenty paces away when the walkway on the opposite side was swarmed with people. Cries echoed. And arrows hissed.
Take cover cried the witcher.
Arrows fell like a veritable hailstorm. The feathers hummed and the tips tore into the pavement raising sparks and reduced the stucco walls to a fine powder.
Get down! Over the railing!
They fell to the ground each with cover behind decorative columns with carved floral motifs. However not without injury. The witcher heard Angoulême scream. He turned and saw that she was holding her arm. From her sleeve blood was seeping.
Angoulême!
Its nothing! The arrow pierced me cleanly! The girl said her voice trembling slightly confirming what he had seen. If the tip had chipped a bone Angoulême would have fainted from shock.
The archers launching their arrows from the end of the gallery called for reinforcements. Some ran around the sides looking for better shooting angles. Geralt cursed and calculated the distance to the archway. It did not look good. But staying where they were meant death.
We have to get the hell out of here! He shouted. Listen up! Cahir help Angoulême!
They are going to mow us down!
We have to go! There is no choice!
No! Milva exclaimed rising with her bow in hand. She stood up and took a firing position. She looked like a statue a marble Amazon with her bow. The archers in the gallery shouted.
Milva released the bowstring.
One of the archers flew backwards and smashed against the wall and where he slumped to the ground the red spot splashed to the plaster resembled an octopus. From around the gallery sounded a cry a roar of anger rage and horror.
The Great Sun… Cahir whistled. Geralt squeezed his arm.
Lets go! Help Angoulême!
From the gallery a shower of arrows fell upon Milva. The archer did not flinch when one arrow showered her in a cloud of plaster dust or jump when marble fragments shattered around her. She quietly released the bowstring. A new cry and another archer collapsed like a puppet spraying his fellows with brains and blood.
Now! Geralt cried watching the guards flee from the gallery and fall to the floor taking cover from the incoming missiles.
Only the three bravest returned fire. An arrow hit the wall and dusted Milvas hair in lime powder. The archer blew a strand of hair from her eyes and readied her bow.
Milva Geralt called after Cahir and Angoulême had run to safety. Enough! Run!
Just one more said the archer with the feather of the arrow at the corner of her mouth.
The bowstring hummed. One of the brave three screamed in pain leaned over the rail and fell against the pavement of the patio. Seeing this the other two faltered. They fell to the ground and huddled. Those who were rushing into the gallery were apparently reluctant and stayed in safe shelter from Milvas arrows.
With one exception.
Milva evaluated him on sight. Not very tall dark complexion brown-haired. With a glossy protector on his left forearm and a glove on his right hand. The girl saw that his compound bow was beautifully crafted with a fitted handle and a curved staff as it tightened smoothly.
She could see how tense the cord was as it crossed his swarthy face she saw the arrows feathers touch his cheek. She saw that he measured exactly.
Milva readied her bow strung it deftly and aimed. The string came up to her face one of the feathers grazed the corner of her mouth.
Harder harder Maria to the mouth. Move your fingers on the bowstring so the arrow does not come loose from the notch. Let your hand rest on your jaw. Aim! Both eyes open! Hold your breath! Shoot!
The bowstring despite her protector painfully bit into her left forearm.
Her father wanted to say something but fell into a fit of coughing - dry crisp torturous.
The cough was getting worse thought Maria Barring as she lowered the bow. Worse and more frequent. He coughed yesterday just as I aimed at a deer. And for lunch we had boiled cabbage. I hate boiled cabbage. I hate being hungry. And misery.
The older Barring gasped and wheezed harshly.
You hit an inch from the centre oaf! A whole inch! I told you not to move or drop the bow! And you sit there wiggling as if someone had put a snail in your ass. And you spend too long aiming. Youll get weary hands just shoot! Or youll keep wasting arrows!
I hit it! And not a whole inch but barely half a span from the centre!
Do not argue! The gods punished me when they sent me you instead of a son and moreover awkward as a boob!
Im not a boob!
Well show me. Shoot again. And learn from what Ive said. No wiggling like youre stuck in the ground. Aim and shoot without hesitation. Why are you crying?
Because you scrutinize me.
Its a fathers right. Shoot.
She tightened the bow. She was crying. He saw it.
I love you Maria he said softly. Never forget that.
She let go of the string the feathers barely touched the corner of her mouth.
Good said her father. Good my daughter.
He began to cough in a terrible rattling way.
The black archer was killed on the spot. Milvas arrow struck him under the left arm and penetrated deeply more than halfway down the shaft shattering ribs and smashing the lungs and heart.
He fired a fraction of a second earlier and the red feathered arrow struck Milva low in the abdomen. It tore into her guts and severed an artery and shattered her pelvis. The archer fell to the floor as if hit by a battering ram.
Geralt and Cahir cried out with one voice. Aware that the Milva was down the archers in the gallery once again jumped up and fired a hail of arrows. One of the arrows hit Cahirs helmet. A second Geralt swore combed his hair.
Milva left behind her a large shiny trail of blood. In the place where she lay in a blink of an eye it had grown into a puddle on the floor. Cahir cursed his hands were shaking. Geralt felt overwhelmed by despair. And rage.
Auntie! Howled Angoulême. Auntie dont die!
Maria Barring opened her mouth coughed horribly and spit blood down her chin.
I love you too Dad she said clearly.
And she died.
Vilgefortzs shaved minions could not cope with the struggling and screaming Ciri. Some servants had to go to their aid. One received an accurate kicked that made him recoil knees bent and clinging with both hands to his groin.
But this only served to infuriate the others. Ciri received a punch in the neck and a slap in the face. She turned and another one gave her a kick in the hip and someone sat on her legs.
One of the bald minions and a young man knelt on her chest fingers tangling in her hair and pulling hard. Ciri howled.
The minion also howled. Ciri saw blood drip from his bald skull staining the white outfit with a macabre drawing.
A second later the lab became a hell. The furniture was overturned with a crash. The strident pops and cracks from glasses bursting mixed with the hellish howls of the confused people. The decoctions filters elixirs extracts and other magical substances spilled onto the tables and the ground mixing and combining. Some contacting hissed and burst forth in clouds of yellow smoke. The room was immediately filled with a caustic stench.
Amid the smoke and tears produced by the stench Ciri looked in shock at the thing that moved about the laboratory. A black figure resembling a gigantic bat. She saw the bat hook the minions into flight and release them high in the air yelling as they fell. Before her eyes it snapped up one of the servants that was trying to get away and slammed it against a table where he began to howl and shake spraying blood on retorts stills beakers and flasks.
A fluid from some broken container sprayed a lamp. It hissed and the lamp exploded.
Ciri had to dodge the fireball headed at her face. She clenched her teeth to keep from screaming.
In the steel chair which was prepared for her sat a slender gray-haired main in a black jacket. He gritted his fangs into the neck of a young minion which rested on his knees and sucked his blood. The bald man groaned and his limbs twitched convulsively.
Pallid blue flames danced on the tables. Flasks retorts and stills exploded in the heat one after the other.
The vampire drew his fangs away from his victims throat and look at Ciri with onyx black eyes.
The opportunity arises he said as if in explanation when you just cant resist the drink.
Do not fear he smiled where he saw her expression. Do not worry Ciri. Im glad I found you. My name is Emiel Regis and I although you may find it incredible am a friend of the witcher Geralt. I came to this castle with him.
An armed mercenary ran into the burning lab. Geralts companion turned his head towards him hissed and bared his fangs. The mercenary screamed terribly. His scream soon faded into silence or the distance.
Emiel Regis dropped the minions body to the ground stood up and stretched just like a cat.
Who would have thought? He said. Such an insect and yet he had great blood in him. This is what we call a - hidden quality. Lets go Ciri Ill escort you to Geralt.
No Ciri said.
Do not be afraid of me.
Im not afraid she protested bravely clenching her jaw so that he could not hear her teeth chattering in terror. No because… Because Yennefer is imprisoned somewhere here. I have to find her as quickly as possible. I fear that Vilgefortz… Please sir…
Emiel Regis.
Warn Geralt good sir that Vilgefortz is here. He is a sorcerer a powerful sorcerer. Geralt has to be careful.
You have to be careful Regis repeated his warning staring at Milva lying motionless. Because Vilgefortz is a powerful sorcerer. She went to free Yennefer.
Geralt cursed.
Come on he shouted to wake up the spirits of his companions. Lets go!
Lets go Angoulême stood up wiping her tears. Lets go! We need to kick some ass!
I feel in me the vampire hissed with a sinister smile a power with which I could smash down this whole castle.
The witcher looked at him suspiciously.
I dont think so he said. But try and break through to the upper levels and stir it up and try and lure away some attention from me. Ill look for Ciri. She has not been treated well vampire and you left her alone.
She demanded it Regis explained quietly. In a tone that ruled out any discussion. I admit I was surprised.
I know. Go to the upper floors. And hold on! I will try to find her and Yennefer.
He found her. And it was fast.
He met them out of the blue totally unexpected when running around a corner in the corridor. He was met with a sight that made his blood boil and the veins stick out on the back of his hands.
Yennefer was being dragged down the hall by a group of guards. She was ragged and bound in chains but it did not prevent her from putting up a fight with her captors and swear at them like a porter.
Geralt did not let them recover from their surprise. He slashed once and only once a short economical movement of his forearm. A guard howled like a dog turned on the spot and smashed his head into the plate armour statue standing in the hallway alcove; he slipped to the ground and smeared blood over the armour.
His three companions released Yennefer and quickly backed away. But one grabbed the sorceress by the hair and held a knife to her throat just above the dimeritium collar.
Stay away! He shouted. Or Ill slaughter her! Im not kidding!
Me either Geralt twirled his sword and looked the man in the eye.
The man could not stand it; he released Yennefer and ran back to his companions. All of them had their hands on weapons. One of them took an antique halberd from the wall. They spread out into a semi-circular attack position.
I knew youd come Yennefer said straightening up proudly. Geralt teach these ruffians what a sword in the hands of a witcher can do.
She raised her hands high lifting the shackles. Geralt grasped Sihil in both hands cocked his head slightly and took aim. He slashed. So fast that no one saw the blade move.
The shackles fell with a clatter to the floor. One of the guards sighed. Geralt tightened his grip moving his index finger under the hilt.
Dont move Yen. Tilt your head slightly to the side please.
The sorceress did not even blink. The sound of the sword striking metal was very faint.
The dimeritium collar fell beside the chains on the floor. On the sorceress neck appeared on tiny drop of blood. She rubbed her wrists and laughed. She slowly turned to the guards.
None of them held her gaze.
The one with the halberd carefully as if afraid to break it laid it on the floor.
With someone like that he mused the Owl can fight her in person. I value my life.
We were ordered… Muttered another retreating. We were ordered… The decision was not ours…
We have never treated you badly maam said a third his mouth going dry. While in prison… Bear witness…
Be gone said the sorceress. Liberated from the dimeritium she stood erect with her head held proudly and in their eyes she appeared as a giantess. It seemed to them that her tousled black mane touched the roof of the vaulted corridor.
The guards fled. Hunched as if expecting an attack from behind but none of them looked back. Yennefer returned to her normal size. She threw her arms around Geralts neck.
I knew that youd come for me she whispered searching with her mouth for his lips. That youd come even if…
Lets go he said after a moment gasping for air. Now for Ciri.
Ciri she said and in her eyes for a brief moment blazed a fearsome purple fire. And Vilgefortz.
From around a corner a mercenary crossbowman jumped out shouted and fired. He aimed for the sorceress. Geralt jumped as if driven by a spring and waved his sword. The arrow deflected and flew over the head of the archer so close that he had to duck. He did not have time to stand again because the witcher jumped forward and skewered him like a carp.
Further along in the hallway stood two others who also had crossbows and fired them but their hands were shaking so they did not find their mark. In the next moment the witcher was among them and they both died.
Which way Yen?
The sorceress focused closing her eyes.
This way. After these steps.
Are you sure thats a good way to go?
Yes.
More mercenaries attacked them from just behind the corner of the hallway near an ornate archway. There were more than ten and they were armed with spears and halberds.
And they were determined and stubborn. Despite this they went down quickly.
Yennefer immediately struck one in the chest with a ball of fire. Geralt spun in a pirouette and fell among the others his Dwarven Sihil flashing and hissing like a snake. When four more had fallen then others fled clanging and clattering along the corridors.
All right Yen?
Could not be better.
Under the archway stood Vilgefortz.
Im impressed he said quietly. Im really impressed witcher. You are hopelessly naive and stupid but your technique is really impressive.
Your underlings Yennefer said calmly just took off and left you. Give us Ciri and well leave you alone.
You know Yennefer sneered the wizard that is the second generous offer Ive had today? Thank you thank you. And here is my answer…
Look out! Yennefer screamed and jumped. Geralt also jumped to the side at the last minute. A pillar of fire roared from the wizards hands and burst through the place Geralt stood a moment before hissing and burning the area. The witcher wiped soot and the charred remains of an eyebrow from his face. He saw Vilgefortz again raise his hand. He dodged and ducked behind a column. The boom popped his ears. The whole castle shook on its foundations.
Echoes of the vast boom rolled through the corridors halls and rooms of the castle. The walls trembled and rafters creaked. With a loud crack a portrait with a heavy gilt frame fell from the wall.
In the eyes of the fleeing mercenaries was an unspeakable fear. Stefan Skellen mollified them with a threatening glare and called them to order with a stern look and voice.
What is it? Report!
Mister Coroner… grunted one of them. This is terrible! They are demons… Every arrow kills one of us… Every slash sprays red blood… Death is coming for us… He butchered everyone! We lost ten men… Maybe more… Do you hear that?
The boom repeated the castle trembled again.
Magic Skellen said through clenched teeth. Vilgefortz… Well now well see whos who.
He approached another soldier. He was pale and covered with debris. For a while he was unable to bring himself to speak when he finally spoke his voice trembled.
There… there… is a monster… Mister Coroner… Big black bat… Tearing at peoples heads. Blood ran in streams! And he flew around and laughed… And his teeth!
It could not carry the heads… Someone whispered from behind the Owl.
Mister Coroner Boreas Mun decided to speak. There are ghosts. I saw… young Count Cahir aep Ceallach. And he is dead.
Skellen looked at him but said nothing.
Lord Stefan… Dacre Silifant mumbled. Who are we fighting here?
They are not men moaned one of the mercenaries. They are demons from hell! A force no human can hope to stand against…
The Owl crossed his arms and stared at the mercenaries with an authoritarian and determined look.
Then he proclaimed loudly and clearly we will not meddle in the conflict between the forces of hell! Let the demons fight with demons sorcerers with sorcerers and vampires can crawl out of their tombs. We wont disturb them! We will stay here quietly and await the outcome of the fight.
The faces of the mercenaries shone. The mood grew palpable.
This stair Skellen said in a strong voice is the only way out. Well wait here. Lets see who tries to go down them.
From above came a terrible boom. They could smell sulphur and smoke even here.
It is dark in here! The Owl shouted loud and clear to give encouragement to his troops. Move get some torches! We need light to shine on those stairs! Light a fire in those braziers!
We have no fuel Sir!
Skellen wordlessly pointed to the artworks on the wall in the hall.
The artworks? A mercenary asked incredulously. We are to burn paintings?
Why not? Said the Owl. What are you looking at? Art is dead!
The frames were broken down to chips and the images shredded. The well dried wood and the cloth saturated with varnish immediately caught flame.
Boreas Mun watched. Already fully committed.
A thunderous noise a flash and the column from where they were hiding a moment before crumbled apart. The core broke; the decorated column crashed to the floor and crushed a terracotta mosaic. From the side flew a hissing ball of lightning. Yennefer stopped it uttering spells and gesturing.
Vilgefortz walked towards them his cloak billowing out behind him like dragon wings.
Im not surprised by Yennefer he said walking. She is a woman so she is evolutionarily lower and ruled by her hormones. But you however Geralt youre not only a man who is inherently reasonable but a mutant exempt from emotions…
He gestured. Thunder. A flash. Lightning rebounded from Yennefers shield.
But despite your better judgement continued Vilgefortz passing fire from one hand to another you demonstrate a remarkable consistency and know nothing. You constantly want to paddle against the current and piss into the wind. It had to end badly. Know that today here; in castle Stygga you have pissed into a hurricane.
Somewhere on the lower floors was furious fighting someone shouted screamed and then groaned in pain. Something burned Ciri could smell the burning smell and smoke a gust of warmer air was blown into her face.
Something banged with such forces that even the roof trembled on its support columns and stucco showered from the walls.
Ciri cautiously peered around a corner. The corridor was empty. She went quickly and quietly flanked on both sides by statues in the wall niches. She had seen those statues before.
In her dreams.
She left the corridor and came face to face with a man armed with a spear. She stopped short ready to jump and spin. But then realised that this was not a man but a woman with grey hair skinny and bent. And she was not carrying a spear but a broom.
There is a prisoner here Ciri said a black-haired sorceress. Where is she?
The woman with the broom was silent for a long moment moving her mouth as if chewing something.
And how would I know my dove? She mumbled finally. Im here to clean.
She turned her back to the girl and began to sweep.
I clean and I clean and I clean she repeated to herself. And every time it just becomes dirty again. Just look at this mess my dove.
Ciri looked. On the floor she saw a wide winding bloody smear. It ran for a few steps and ended at a wall under a dead man. Nearby lay two more dead men one twisted in his death throws the second with outspread limbs. Next to them lay crossbows.
There is mess again she said taking a bucket and rag dropping to her knees she began to mop the floor. Such filth. And I already got it clean. Will it never end?
No said Ciri flatly. Never. Such is the way of the world.
The old woman stopped mopping but did not turn her head.
I clean she said. Nothing more. But you my dove you should go straight and then left.
Thank you.
The woman bowed her head lower and again wearily began to mop.
She was alone. Alone and lost in a maze of corridors.
Lady Yennefer!
So far she had kept silent fearing that yelling would attract Vilgefortzs people. But now…
Yennefeeeeeer!
It seemed to her that she heard something. Yes definitely!
She ran into a gallery and then into a great hall with high porches. Again she smelt the burning smell.
Bonhart emerged like a spirit from a niche and hit her in the face with his fist. She stumbled and he jumped on her like a hawk grabbing her by the throat and pushing her against the wall with his forearm. Ciri looked into his pale fishlike eyes and felt her heart drop low in her chest.
I would not have found you if you were not calling out he croaked. And how wistfully you called. Do you long for me so my darling?
Still against the wall his hand slipped behind her neck. Ciri tossed her head. The Bounty hunter bared his teeth. He slid his hand over her chest squeezing her breast and brutally grabbed her crotch. The he released her and pushed she fell to the floor.
He threw a sword at her feet. Swallow. And she immediately understood what he wanted.
I would have preferred the arena he drawled. As a culmination the finale to your fine performances. The witcheress versus Leo Bonhart! Eh people would pay to see something like that! Come on! Lift the steel and draw it.
She obeyed. But did not draw the sword from its sheath she slung the belt over her shoulder so that the hilt was in reach.
Bonhart took a step back.
I thought he said that my old eyes would be comforted by what Vilgefortz was going to do to you. I was wrong. I need to feel how your blood flows down my sword. To hell with vile sorcery and sorcerers destiny prophecies and the fate of the world defiling elder and younger blood. What does all this divination and witchcraft mean to me? Shit! Nothing can compare with the pleasure…
He did not finish the sentence. She saw his lips move and his eyes flash ominously.
Ill release the blood from your veins witcheress he hissed. And then before it gets cold we will celebrate. Youre mine. All mine. Raise your weapon!
The castle shook from a distant rumble.
Vilgefortz Bonhart announced gleefully is making mincemeat of your valiant rescuers. Well darling draw your sword.
Flee she thought paralysed with fear flee to another place to another time far away from him. She felt shame. Run? Leave Geralt and Yennefer to their mercy? But common sense told her dead I can do nothing to help them…
She concentrated pressed her fists to her temples.
Bonhart immediately understood what was going on and rushed to her. But he reacted too late.
There was a flash and a murmur in her ears
I did it she thought triumphantly.
She immediately realised that the triumph was premature. She realised that she could hear angry shouts and curses. The failure was probably caused by the evil paralysing aura of this place. She had transferred but only a small jump. She had not even gotten out of sight of the opposite end of the gallery. She was not far from Bonhart. But she was still beyond his reach and his sword. At least temporarily.
Dogged by his roar she turned and ran away.
She ran along long wide corridors the dead eyes of the statues followed her. She turned once then a second time. She wanted to get lost and confuse Bonhart; moreover she was headed towards the sounds of battle. Where it was being fought were her friends.
She entered into a large circular room in the middle of which stood a marble plinth sculpture representing a woman with a veiled face probably a goddess. The room opened onto two corridors both quite narrow. She picked one at random. She chose the wrong path.
The girl! Roared one of the mercenaries. We have her!
There were too many of them to risk a fight even in a narrow corridor. And Bonhart was probably close. Ciri turned and ran to escape. She entered the room with the marble goddess. And froze.
Before her stood a knight with a large sword in a black coat and a helmet adorned with the wings of a bird of prey.
The city was burning. She could hear the crackling of the fire could see the undulation of the flames she felt the heat of the fire and the neighing of horses the screams of the victims… Suddenly there appeared a black bird flapping its wings covering everything…
Help!
Cintra she realised returning to reality. And Thanedd island. He caught up to me here. Hes a demon. Im surrounded by ghosts and phantoms from my nightmares. Bonhart is behind me and him in front.
She could hear screaming and the pounding of boots.
The knight in the helmet with the feathers made a sudden move. Ciri overcame her fear. Swallow was yanked out of its sheath.
Do not touch me!
The knight stepped back and to Ciris amazement she saw that his cloak hid a blonde girl armed with a curved sabre. The girl slipped around Ciri and slashed with her sabre at a mercenary. The black knight instead of attacking Ciri swung a powerful slash and killed another mercenary. The other retreated into the hallway.
The blonde girl rushed to the door but could not close it. She brandished her sabre threateningly and screamed pushing the mercenaries from the portal. Ciri watched as one of the mercenaries stabbed her with a spear she watched as the girl fell to her knees. She jumped forwards and swung Swallow slashing the sword horribly across one of the mercenaries the Black knight ran forward. The blonde girl still on her knees drew an axe from her belt and threw it hitting one of the men in the face. Then she reached the door slammed it and the knight bolted it.
Uff! Said the girl. Oak and iron! It will take them some time before they can get through that door!
They will not waste the time theyll seek another way said the black knight matter-of-factly the frowned suddenly seeing the blood seeping from the girls leg. The blonde waved her hand it was nothing.
We have to get out of here the knight took off his helmet and looked at Ciri. I am Cahir Mawr Dyffryn the son of Ceallach. I came here with Geralt. To rescue you Ciri. I know that it is unbelievable.
Ive seen unbelievable things Ciri said. You have come a long way… Cahir… Where is Geralt?
He stared at her. She remembered those eyes from Thanedd. Deep blue nice.
He is saving the sorceress he said. Here…
Yennefer. Lets go.
Yeah said the blonde girl knotting an emergency bandage around her thigh. We have to kick a few asses! For Auntie!
Lets go repeated the knight.
But it was too late.
Run Ciri whispered seeing who was coming down the second passage. It is the devil incarnate. But he wants me and will not chase you… Go. Help Geralt…
Cahir shook his head.
Ciri he said mildly. Im surprised at you. I cross the whole world to see you and now that I found you to redeem myself to save you and defend you. And you want me to run away now?
You dont know who you are dealing with.
Cahir tugged on his gloves removed his coat and wrapped it around his left arm. He waved his sword and swung it until it whistled in the air.
I would know.
At the sight of the trio Bonhart stopped. But only for a moment.
Oh he said. There was a rescue? Your friends witcheress? All right. Two more or less it does not make a difference.
Ciri suddenly thought of something.
Say goodbye to your life Bonhart she cried. This is your end. Here is your match!
Undoubtedly she exaggerated. Bonhart caught the false note in her voice. He looked suspicious.
The witcher? Really?
Cahir swung his sword standing in position. Bonhart did not waver.
Well well the witcher is younger than I believed he hissed. Look here boy.
He opened his mail shirt. On his chest glistened three silver medallions – an eagle a cat and a wolf.
If youre a real witcher the Bounty hunter gritted his teeth know that soon your amulet will adorn my collection. And if youre not the witcher youll be dead before you can blink your eyes. It would be more sensible in that case to get out of my way and flee. I want this wench I have nothing against you.
Strong words Cahir said calmly. Lets see what else you can do. Angoulême Ciri run!
Cahir…
Go he said help Geralt.
They ran off. Ciri helped the limping girl.
You asked for it Bonhart narrowed his pale eyes as he did he twirled his sword.
Asked for it? Echoed Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach dully. No. It is my destiny!
They rushed towards each other and collided violently. The blades clattered against each other the corridor carried the sound of steel banging on steel.
Not bad Bonhart gasped when they moved apart. Not bad boy. But youre not a witcher that little bitch wanted to deceive me. Its your turn. Prepare to die.
Strong words.
Cahir breathed deeply. The first encounter convinced him that his chances were slim. The old killer was too fast and strong. His only hope was that he rushed in order to chase Ciri and clearly nervous.
Bonhart attacked again. Cahir parried cut ducked jumped grabbed his opponents wrist pushed him to the wall and put his knee is his groin. Bonhart grabbed him by the face and slammed the hilt of his sword into the side of his head once twice three times. Cahir blocked the third strike. He saw the flash of the blade and instinctively parried.
Too slowly.
There was a strict adherence to family tradition in the Dyffryn house that the body of a fallen relative was to be housed in the castle armoury and all the men in the family to visit and stay in an all day and night vigil. Women gathered in a remote wing of the castle so as not to disturb the men or distract them or interfere with their thoughts with their sobbing and fainting spells.
Among the nobility of Vicovaro sobbing and tears were not seen even among the women. It was considered tactless and a great dishonour. But in the Dyffryn house there were different traditions and they would not change. And had no intention of doing so. At ten years old Cahirs youngest brother Aillil was killed in Nazair and was lying in the castle armoury due to custom and tradition he was not considered to be a grown man.
He was not invited to a gathering of men over the open coffin but was not allowed to sit silent alongside his grandfather Gruffyd his father Ceallach his brother Dheran or his uncles and cousins. Understandably he was neither allowed to mourn and faint in with his grandmother his mother his three sisters or his aunts and cousins. Small Cahir preferred running around the walls and fighting with his peers from families who came with their parents for the funeral burial and ceremony. Cahir was devoted to making mischief by the walls. He fought with the other boys who claimed their older brothers fought the bravest at Naziar and not Aillil aep Ceallach.
Cahir! Come to me my son!
On the porch stood Mawr the boys mother and her sister Aunt Cinead var Anahid. His mothers face was red and swollen from mourning and it frightened Cahir. It shook him that even such a comely woman such as his mother could look like a monster because of crying.
He firmly decided that he would never cry ever.
Remember my son Mawr sobbed clutching her child to her breast so hard he could not breathe. Remember this day. Never forget who put your dear brother Aillil to death. It was those damn Nordlings. Your enemies my son. Be sure to hate them. Never stop hating that damn nation of murderers!
I will always hate mother Cahir promised somewhat surprised. First his brother Aillil had fallen fighting with honour. It had been a death worthy and enviable of a warrior. Why then spill tears for him? Second it was no secret that Grandmother Eviva Mawrs mother came from the Nordlings. His father in anger more than once had called his grandmother she-wolf of the North. Naturally behind her back.
But his mother now wanted…
I hate them! He cried enthusiastically. I hate them all! And when Im big and I have a real sword Ill go to war and chop off their heads! Youll see Mother!
His mother took a deep breath and began to sob. Aunt Cinead steadied her.
Cahir clenched his fists shaking with anger. Anger and hatred towards those who had wronged his mother making her so ugly.
Bonharts blow smashed his temple cheek and mouth. Cahir dropped his sword and stumbled; the Bounty hunter swung again and slashed him between his neck and collarbone. Cahir fell at the feet of the marble goddess his blood like a pagan sacrifice pooled at the base of the statue.
Rumbling the floor shook beneath their feet a decorative shield fell to the floor with a crash. The corridor was filled with acrid smoke. Ciri wiped her face. The blonde girl weighed on her like a millstone.
Faster… Run faster…
I cant breathed the girl and sat down heavily on the floor. Ciri stunned watched the blood oozing from her leg. She was pale as death.
Ciri knelt and quickly took off her scarf and belt and tried to make a tourniquet. But the wound was large and deep and very high on the leg too close to the groin. The blood would not stop flowing.
The girl grabbed her hand. Her fingers were as cold as ice.
Ciri…
Yes.
I am Angoulême. I did not believe… I did not believe that we would find you. But I followed Geralt… Because it was impossible not to follow. Did you know?
I know. He is well.
We found you… And I scoffed at Fringilla… Tell me…
Dont talk please.
Tell… Angoulêmes lips moved slower and with more difficulty. Say youre still a princess… In Cintra… Ill be rewarded right? Youll make me… a Countess? Tell me. Do not lie… Can you? Tell me.
Dont talk. Save your strength.
Angoulême sighed suddenly leaned forward and rested her forehead on Ciris shoulder.
I knew… She said quite clearly. I knew a whorehouse in Toussaint was a better idea.
It took a long time before Ciri realised that she was holding a dead girl in her arms.
She saw him coming watched by the dead eyes of the marble caryatids lining the arcade.
She finally realised that escape was impossible that she could not escape him. That she would have to face him. There was no other choice.
But she was still scared.
She drew her weapon. Swallows edge softly sang as she pulled it from the sheath. She knew this song.
She retreated into a wide corridor he followed her holding his sword in both hands blood trickled down the blade heavy drops dripped onto the floor.
Dead he said stepping over the body of Angoulême. Good. The boy also went down.
Ciri felt overwhelmed by desperation. Her fingers tightened painfully on the hilt. She retreated.
You lied to me Bonhart drawled. The boy had no medallion. But something tells me that here in this castle is someone wearing a medallion. There will be someone old Leo Bonhart will find near the sorceress Yennefer. But first things first viper. You and me. And our engagement.
Ciri decided. She twirled Swallow and moved into position. She moved in a semicircle around him going faster forcing the Bounty hunter to rotate on the spot.
The last time he said this trick was useless. Dont you know how to learn from your mistakes?
Ciri quickened her pace. The soft flowing movements of her sword were meant to disorientate and mesmerize. Bonhart turned and spun his sword.
This doesnt work on me he spat. Im bored by it!
He took two quick steps to shorten the distance.
Music maestro!
Bonhart jumped and launched an attack Ciri dodged with a pirouette jumped and landed safely on her left leg and immediately struck. Even before her blade hit Bonharts she was spinning around him and launching a smooth cut. She struck again without expansion from an unexpected and unusual bending of her elbow. Bonhart parried and used the momentum to attack from the left. Ciri saw it coming and with a slight bend of her knees she avoided the blade but only by an inch. She went quickly on the attack chopping and cutting. But Bonhart was waiting this time and deceived her with a feint. Unable to stop and nearly off balance Ciri was only saved by a lightning jump but did not prevent the reach of Bonharts sword to her shoulder. At first she thought that the blade had only cut through the padded sleeve but after a moment she felt warm liquid run down her arm.
The marble caryatids watched them with indifference.
Ciri retreated but he stayed behind her stooped over and flicking his sword from side to side like a scythe. Like a Grim Reaper Ciri had seen in a fresco in the temple. The dance of Death she thought. He approaches like the Grim Reaper.
She retreated. Hot wet blood was running down her arm and onto her hand.
First blood to me he said looking at the trail of drops which had been left behind on the floor. Who will get the second my princess?
She retreated.
Look closely. This is the end.
Bonhart was right. The hallway ended suddenly at an abyss. This wing of the castle was damaged and the floor had collapsed. Leaving the supporting structure – columns timbers and beams.
Below the ground was littered with debris.
Ciri hesitated. She moved onto a horizontal beam and kept retreating from him.
Bonharts eyes watched her every move. It saved her. Abruptly he lunged at her running across the beam his sword flashing with cuts and feints. She knew his intention. One bad parry or any other error and she would lose her balance and fall down to the broken lower floor.
This time Ciri was not fooled by his feints. Just the opposite. Bonhart skilfully cut from the right. Seeing her rival hesitate a split second she launched a new blow to his right hand so fast and strong that Bonhart rocked the beam. He would have fallen if not for his height.
He stretched his left hand and caught hold of an overhead beam keeping his balance. But he briefly lost his concentration. And for Ciri that was enough. She launched a powerful cut straining her sword arm to its maximum length.
He did not even flinch when Swallows blade with a whistle cut him from his chest to his left shoulder. He immediately struck back with such force that if Ciri had not jumped back the blow would have split her in half. She jumped to an adjacent beam falling into a kneeling position and raised her sword horizontally above her head.
Bonhart looked at his shoulder and raised his left hand down which already ran a scarlet trickle. He watched the drops falling down into the abyss.
Well well he said. Now I know you can learn from your mistakes.
His voice trembled with rage. But Ciri knew him to well. He was calm focused and ready to kill.
He jumped onto her beam his sword twirling and rushed at her like a storm running confidently without hesitation not even looking at his feet. The beam creaked and dust trickled downwards. He pressed her with blows forcing her to walk backwards. His attacks were so continuous that Ciri could not jump or spin; she simply had to stop the blows and try to avoid them.
She noticed a glint in his fish eyes. She knew what it was.
He was trying to corner her against a pillar pushing her like a spider under a trestle.
Pushing her to a point where there was no escape. She had to do something. And suddenly she knew what.
Kaer Morhen. The Pendulum.
Youre not deflecting the pendulum your deflecting yourself from it. Youre intercepting its energy which you need in order to deal a blow. Do you see?
Yes Geralt.
Suddenly swift as an attacking snake she counterattacked. Swallow hissed through the air and collided with Bonharts sword. At the same time Ciri bounced and jumped to an adjacent beam. She landed miraculously keeping her balance. She ran a few steps and lightly jumped again back to the Bonharts beam landing behind him. He turned just in time slashing almost blindly where she had landed.
He missed her by a hair; the strength of the blow staggered him. Ciri struck like lightning. She slashed from a lunge and again fell to her knees. The slash was powerful and accurate.
He froze with his sword at his side. She watched the long straight smooth cut on his jacket start to ooze blood.
You… Bonhart shuddered. You…
He lunged at her. However it was slow and clumsy. She escaped by jumping back and he could not keep his balance. He fell to one knee but it slipped off the timber because the wood was slick with his blood. For a moment he looked at Ciri.
Then he fell into the abyss.
She watched as he fell to the floor raising a geyser of dust lime and blood. She saw his sword fall a few feet away from him. He lay motionless with arms flung wide tall and thin.
Badly wounded and quite vulnerable. But still scary.
It took a while but he finally moved and groaned. He tried to lift his head. He moved his legs. He moved his hands. He crawled to a pillar and leaned against its foot. He moaned again and probed his bloody chest and abdomen with both hands.
Ciri jumped. She landed a few feet away in a crouch as softly as a cat. She saw his fish eyes widen in fear.
You won… He croaked looking at Swallows blade. You won witcheress. It was a pity it was not in the arena… It would have been a spectacle…
She did not answer.
I gave you that sword remember?
I remember everything.
Why me… He moaned. You will not hurt or murder a defenceless man… You are too… noble.
She looked at him for a long time. A very long time. Then she bent down his fish eyes nearly popped out of their sockets. But she only tore the medallions from around his neck – the eagle the cat and the wolf. Then she turned and walked towards the exit.
He leaped at her with a knife in his hand cunningly and treacherously. As quiet as a ghost. Only at the last moment when his dagger was about to go into her back did he scream. In it was all of his rage and hatred.
She avoided the cowardly attack with a half-turn and jumped away. She immediately shifted and struck hard and strong with her whole arm strengthening the cut with a twist of her hips. Swallow whistled and cut with the tip of its blade. Bonhart clutched at his throat. His fish eyes bulged from their sockets.
I told you Ciri said coldly. I remember everything.
Bonhart stared at her wide-eyed. Then he fell.
He fell backwards into the dust which billowed around him. He lay on his back tall skinny and skeletal and squeezed his throat with all his might. But no matter how firmly he held his life slipped out between his fingers and the layer of grey dust under his body grew wet and black.
Ciri stood over him. Without saying anything. But ensuring that he saw. That this last image would be the image that accompanied him wherever he went.
He looked at her with hardening eyes. He convulsively reared up digging his heels into the ground. Then he gurgled like a funnel emptying.
And that was the last sound he made.
The stone walls trembled beams cracked and glass poured from lead frames.
Watch out Geralt!
He dodged again at the last moment. Brilliant lightning ploughed a furrow in the ground the air hissed with colour - murderously sharp fragments from broken windows. Lightning hit the column behind which the witcher hid. The column broke up into three parts. It broke from the roof and collapsed to the floor with a deafening crash.
Geralt lying flat on the floor his head cupped in his hands was aware of how miserable a shield this was from the falling debris. He prepared for the worst but nothing happened. He jumped up and could see the glow of a magical shield around him he realised Yennefers magic had saved him.
Vilgefortz threw a bolt of lightning at the other column behind which the sorceress was hiding. He roared furiously and a cloud of dust and smoke appeared. Yennefer deftly slipped between them and retaliated with her own flash of lightning which bounced off of the wizard with no visible effect. He answered with a crushing blow that knocked Yennefer to the ground.
Geralt wiped the dust from his eyes and attacked. Vilgefortz turned his eyes towards him and pointed his arm and from his hands roared fire. The witcher instinctively swung his sword. The dwarven blade covered with runes shielded him and cut the stream of fire in half.
Ha! Roared Vilgefortz. Impressive witcher! What do you say to this!
The witcher said nothing. He was hit by an invisible battering ram flew backwards fell on the floor and slid until he found the base of a buttress. A pillar flew apart and again tumbled from the roof. This time he did not have Yennefers protection. The heavy carved block struck him in the side fortunately not fully but even so it hurt and completely paralysed him.
Yennefer chanted spells and threw them at Vilgefortz one after another. However none of them hit and they all bounced harmlessly off of the wizards magical shield. Vilgefortz suddenly spread his arms wide. Yennefer wailed in pain and started rising from the ground.
The wizard clapped his hands together and his fingers started to twist as if squeezing a wet rag. The sorceress cried shrilly. And started to squirm.
Geralt clenched his teeth in pain and rose to return to the fight. But he was overtaken by Regis.
The vampire came flying from out of nowhere in the shape of a giant bat and rushed at Vilgefortz quietly. Before the sorcerer could raise a protection spell Regis attacked his face with his claws; he missed the eye because it was so unnaturally small. Vilgefortz yelled and waved his arms in surprise. Yennefer freed from the spell fell with a scream of surprise into a pile of rubble blood spurting from her mouth and down her chin and breasts.
Geralt was already close. He raised Sihil ready to deal a blow. But Vilgefortz had no intention of surrendering. He pushed the witcher with a powerful surge of energy and attacked the vampire with a dazzling white beam which passed through a stone pillar like a hot knife through butter. Regis deftly evaded the beam and returned to his usual form. He materialised at Geralts side.
Be careful the witcher grunted trying to discern what was wrong with Yennefer. Be careful Regis…
Be careful? Said the vampire. I? Thats not why I came here!
With an incredibly long and fast leap he reached the wizard and grabbed him by the throat. His vampire fangs glistened.
Vilgefortz screamed with rage and terror. For a brief moment it appeared this was the end of him. But it was premature. The wizard had an arsenal of weapons for every occasion. And against every opponent – even vampires.
The wizard hands grasped Regis and heated up like red hot irons. The vampire screamed.
Geralt also cried out seeing that the wizard was literally tearing the vampire. He jumped to his friends aid. But was too late. Vilgefortz pushed the vampire into a column with both of his hands burning with white fire.
Regis screamed.
He screamed so loud that the witcher had to cover his ears with his hands. The remains of the windows shattered noisily. The column simply melted. And the vampire melted with it turning into a shapeless stone.
Geralt cursed furiously and desperately. He jumped forward and swung Sihil. The wizard turned and hit him with magical energy. The witcher flew the entire length of the hall hit a wall on the other side and slid down it.
He lay there gasping for air like a fish out of water wondering not what was broken but what was whole.
Vilgefortz walked towards him. In his hand materialised a six-foot-long iron rod.
I could reduce you to ashes with a spell he said. Or I could melt you into a glassy mass as I did with that monster. But you witcher you deserve a different death. In combat. Maybe not a fair fight but still.
Geralt did not believe he could stand up. But he did. He spat blood from his cut lip. He gripped his sword tighter.
In Thanedd said Vilgefortz approaching him twirling the rod I settled for giving you a beating in moderation to serve as a lesson. But I can see that you have not learned anything this time the beating with be thorough and I will not leave a healthy bone in your body. Nobody will be able to put you back together again.
He attacked. Geralt did not try to escape. He accepted the fight.
The rod flashed and whirled spinning around the sorcerer. Both opponents dodged around each other in a deadly dance. The rod flicked like lightning. Geralt managed to parry the hammering blow. Vilgefortz skilfully deflected. Each time steel meet iron it groaned pitifully.
The wizard was quick and nimble like a demon.
Geralt was fooled by a swing at his torso and a mock punch from the left – the opposite end of the stick hit him in the ribs. Before the witcher could get his wind back he received a strong blow to the hip that almost knocked him down. He dodged a blow to the top of his head but did not escape the stab at his stomach. He was thrown against the wall. He had enough presence of mind to fall to the floor. Just at the moment the iron rod brushed his hair and it slammed into the wall raising sparks.
Geralt rolled; the rod drew sparks from the ground right next to his head. A second blow came and hit his shoulder. The shock sent numbing pain and weakness down his legs. The wizard raised the rod. His eyes burned in triumph.
Geralt clenched his fist around Fringillas medallion.
The rod fell. It struck the floor a few inches from the witchers head. Geralt rolled to the side and quickly got up on one knee. Vilgefortz jumped after him and swung again. Again he missed by inches.
He shook his head unable to believe his eyes. He hesitated a moment. Then sighed realising what was happening. His eyes twinkled and he leapt and swung his magical weapon.
But it was too late.
Geralt quickly slashed him across the stomach. Vilgefortz screamed dropped the rod and took a few steps backwards. The witcher followed. Kicked him between the stumps of two columns and slashed his sword in a wide arc diagonally across the wizards torso to his collarbone. Drawing blood.
The wizard screamed and fell to his knees. He lowered his head and look at his chest and abdomen. For a long time he could not look away from what he saw.
Geralt calmly waited with Sihil raised ready to strike.
Vilgefortz lifted his head and wailed shrilly.
Geraaaaaalt…!
The witcher did not let him finish.
For a long time there was silence.
I didnt know… Yennefer said at last rising from the pile of rubble.
She looked pitiful. Blood smeared her chin and chest.
I didnt know she repeated meeting Geralts puzzled gaze that you knew how to cast spells of illusion. And you were able to confuse Vilgefortz…
It was my medallion.
Oh she said suspiciously. An interesting thing. But even so we live thanks to Ciri.
What do you mean?
His eye. He did not regain full coordination. And often missed. Although I mainly owe my life…
She fell silent looking at the remains of the melted column in which she could recognise the outline of a person.
Who was that Geralt?
A friend. Ill miss him very much.
Was he human?
He was an incarnation of humanity. How are you Yen?
Some broken ribs a concussion a bumped hip and a bruised spine. Otherwise Im great. What about you?
Im more or less the same.
Without emotion he eyed Vilgefortz head lying exactly in the middle of the floor of mosaics. The sorcerers little glassy eye watched them with mute reproach.
Nice view she said.
Nice he said. But its not the first Ive seen… Can you walk?
With your help yes.
They met in a place where the corridors came together to form a crescent. They met under the dead eyes of the statues.
Ciri the witcher said rubbing his eyes.
Ciri Yennefer said supported by the witcher.
Geralt Ciri said.
Ciri he answered with a lump in his throat. Im glad to see you again.
Lady Yennefer.
The sorceress released herself from the witchers arms and straightened with a tremendous effort.
What a sight you are girl she said sternly. Look at yourself and how you look. Fix your hair! Dont slouch. Come to me.
Ciri walked stiffly over to Yennefer. Yennefer smoothed her collar and tried to wipe the dried blood from her sleeve. She fixed her hair revealing the scar on her cheek. She hugged her tightly. Very tightly. Geralt saw the sorceresss hands on Ciris back. He saw the deformed fingers. He did not feel anger grief or hatred. He felt only fatigue. And a great desire to be done with it all.
Mummy.
My daughter.
Lets go Geralt decided to interrupt but only after a long time.
Ciri sniffed noisily and wiped her nose with the back of her hand. Yennefer scolded her with a look and rubbed one of her eyes. Surely she had gotten a speck of powder in them. The witcher watched the corridor from which Ciri emerged as if expecting someone else to come from there. Ciri shook her head. He understood.
Lets go he repeated.
Yes said Yennefer. I want to see the sky.
Ill never leave you again Ciri said dully. Never again.
Lets go said Geralt. Ciri help Yen.
I dont need help!
Let me help you mother.
Before them was a staircase. Bathed in smoke and at the bottom flaming torches and braziers with fire. Ciri shivered. She knew those stairs. They had appeared in her dreams and visions.
Below armed men were waiting.
Im tired she said.
Me too said Geralt as he drew Sihil.
Im tired of killing.
Me too.
Is there no other way?
No there is no other way. Only those stairs. We have no choice girl. Yen wants to see the sky. And I want to see the sky Yen and you.
Ciri looked at Yennefer who if not for the railing she was leaning against would have fallen down. She pulled out the medallions she took from Bonhart. The cat she hung around her neck the wolf she gave to Geralt.
I hope you know the witcher said its just a symbol.
Everything is just symbols.
She drew Swallow from its sheath.
Come on Geralt.
Lets go. Stay close to me.
At the foot of the stairs Skellens mercenaries were waiting for them clutching weapons in sweaty palms. The Owl with a quick gesture sent the first wave of attackers. The stair thundered with the sound of heavy boots.
Slowly Ciri dont rush. Stay close to me.
I know Geralt.
And calmly girl quietly. Remember no anger no hatred. We have to get out of here to see the sky. And those who stand in our way they die. Do not hesitate.
I will not hesitate. I want to see the sky.
They reached the first landing without obstacles. The mercenaries fell back before them amazed and surprised by their icy calm. But after a moment three men leapt forward waving their swords. They died instantly.
Attack all at once the Owl shouted from below. Kill them!
Three more attacked. Geralt stepped forward feinted at one and cut anothers throat. He spun and Ciri dashed under his right arm. The girl slashed a second mercenary under his arm.
The third tried to escape by jumping over the railing. He did not make it.
Geralt wiped a few drops of blood from his face.
Calmly Ciri.
I am calm.
Three more approached. A flash of swords screaming death.
Thick blood trickled down the smooth stone stairs.
A mercenary with a jacket with brass rivets rushed them with a spear. His eyes shone with narcotics use. Ciri with a quick step deflected the spear and Geralt slashed at the man. He wiped his face. They continued to walk without looking back.
The second landing was close.
Kill them! Skellen shouted. Kiillllll!
Heavy footsteps on the stairs. The bright flashing of a blade a shout death.
Excellent Ciri. But calmly. Less excitement. And stay close to me.
Ill never leave you.
Do not strike from the shoulder; you can do it from the elbow. Be careful.
Im careful.
The brightness of a sword a cry blood death.
Excellent Ciri.
I want to see the sky.
I love you.
I love you too.
Watch out. Its getting slippery.
The flash of blades screaming. They walked overtaking the blood pouring down the steps. They continued down the stairs of castle Stygga.
One of the mercenaries slipped on the bloody stairs and fell straight beneath their feet. He wailed for mercy and covered his head with both hands. They walked around him without looking.
They reached the third and lowest landing and no one dared cross their path.
Bows! Stefan Skellen shouted from below. Bows and crossbows! Boreas Mun was supposed to bring crossbows! Where is he?
Boreas Mun – the Owl could not know – was already quite far away. He rode straight to the east with his forehead to the mane of his horse galloping as fast as he could.
Of the other men who were sent to get crossbows only one had returned. When he fired his hands shook and his eyes watered from fisstech. The first bolt hit the railing. The second one did not even hit the stairs.
Higher! The Owl ordered. Get closer you idiot! Shoot up closer!
The crossbowman pretended not to hear. Skellen swore grabbed the crossbow jumped up the stairs knelt and aimed. Geralt immediately covered Ciri with his body but the girl slipped past him and as the rope from the crossbow twanged she was already in position. She twisted her sword into the upper quarter and the bolt hit it so hard it hung in the air a long time before falling to the ground.
Very good Geralt muttered. Very good Ciri. But if you ever do something like that again youll get a spanking.
Skellen threw the crossbow aside. He suddenly realised he was alone.
All of his men huddled at the bottom of the stairs and none were in a hurry to climb.
There even seemed to be less of them. Some had probably run off. For crossbows – no doubt.
The witcher and witcheress calmly without hurrying walked down the blood slicked stairs of castle Stygga. They stood close to each other shoulder to shoulder beguiling the fast movements of their swords.
Skellen stepped back. And did not stop retreating until he reached the bottom. When he was surrounded by his men he realised how far he had come. He cursed helplessly.
Men! He shouted but his voice broke. Forward! At them at once! Follow me!
Get them yourself growled one of them and raised his hand covered in fisstech to his nose. The Owl swung at him and he sprinkled white powered all over his face sleeve and coat lapels.
The witcher and witcheress passed another platform.
When they get down here they will be easier to surround Skellen encouraged. Men to arms!
Geralt looked at Ciri and almost screamed with rage when he noticed silver threads among her ashen hair. He restrained himself. This was not the time for anger.
Be careful he said flatly. Stay close to me.
Ill always be close to you.
Down there it is going to be tricky.
I know but well be together.
We are together.
Im here with you said Yennefer walking down behind them on the slippery stairs.
Together! All together! Shouted the Owl.
The men who had run for the crossbows quickly returned. Without the crossbows but with horror in their eyes.
From the three corridors leading away from the stairs came the roar and banging of doors being broken down with axes. And the sound of heavy boots marching. All of a sudden from the three corridors flowed soldiers with black helmets shields and the silver salamander on their coats. Skellens mercenaries intimidated by their shouts and threats threw down their weapons. Those who hesitated were threatened with crossbows and pikes. After a thundering call to drop all weapons everyone listened because they could see the black soldiers were burning for an excuse to do something. The Owl stood on a step and crossed his arms.
The miraculous rescue Ciri said in a whisper.
Geralt shook his head.
The crossbows and spears were turned in their direction as well.
Glaeddyvan Vort!
Resisting was pointless.
Soldiers swarmed out of the mouth of the corridors like an army of black ants and both the witcher and the witcheress were very very tired. But they did not throw down their swords. They carefully placed them on the steps. Geralt felt the warmth from Ciris arm and could hear her breathing.
Above avoiding the corpses and spilled blood came Yennefer. She showed the soldiers her empty hands and sat down heavily on the step next to Geralt and Ciri. The witcher could felt the heat on his other arm. It is a pity it we could not stay this way forever he thought.
And he knew he could not.
The Owls men were tied up and led away. Suddenly among the soldiers appeared the high ranking officers recognisable by the white plumes and the silver trim on their breastplates and by the respect that the other soldiers gave them.
The soldiers before one of those officers whose helmet had more silver ornaments than any other parted with exceptional respect. Almost bowing.
He stopped in front of Skellen. The Owl – it was clearly visible even in the flickering light of the torches and braziers – went pale as a sheet of paper.
Stefan Skellen the officer said in a voice that rang metallically around the vaulted room. Ill see you in court. Youll be sentenced for treason.
The Owl was led out but his hands were not tied.
The officer turned around. Upstairs a burning tapestry tore itself from the wall and floated down like a large fiery bird. The red flames gleamed on the silver ornaments on his helmet and his lowered visor forged like all the helmets of the black soldiers into the monstrous form of a jagged mouth.
Now its our turn thought Geralt. He was right. The officer stared at Ciri. His eyes shone through the opening in his visor watching everything without missing a detail. Her paleness. The scar on her cheek. The blood on her sleeve and hands. The white streaks in her hair.
Then he turned his eyes to the witcher.
Vilgefortz? He asked in a sonorous voice.
Geralt shook his head.
Cahir aep Ceallach?
Another shake of his head.
A slaughterhouse said the officer looking at the staircase. A bloody slaughterhouse. Well he who lives by the sword… At least you spared the hangman some work. You have travelled a long way witcher.
Geralt did not respond. Ciri sniffed again and wiped her nose on the back of her hand.
Yennefer again scolded her with her eyes. The Nilfgaardian noticed it and smiled.
You came from the other end of the world he continued. For her and her. If only for that something should be done. Lord de Rideaux!
At your service Your Imperial Majesty!
The witcher was not surprised.
Find us a discrete chamber where I can rest and talk undisturbed with Geralt of Rivia. During that time please provide all available services and convenience to both ladies. Obviously under the constant watch of guards.
As you wish Your Majesty!
Geralt follow me please.
The witcher rose. He looked at Ciri and Yennefer wanting to calm them wanting to warn them not to try any nonsense. But it was not needed – they were both extremely tired. And resigned.
You have come a long way repeated Emhyr var Emreis Deithwen Addan yn Carn aep Morvudd the White Flam Dancing on the Barrows of his Enemies.
I dont know Geralt said calmly yours appears to have been longer Duny.
Youve recognised me the Emperor smiled. A lack of beard and a change of behaviour changed me completely. The people who had seen me at Cintra and came to Nilfgaard to have audience with me no longer recognised me. And you saw me only once after all sixteen years ago. I was so etched in your memory?
I did not recognise you youve actually changed very much. I figured out who you are already some time ago. Not without outside help and guidance I guessed what role you were to play in family incest with Ciri. And in one of my nightmares I once dreamed of hideous incest. And here you are in the flesh.
You can hardly keep your feet Emhyr said coldly. And your impertinence is forcing you to be even weaker. I invite you to sit in the presence of the Emperor. I grant you the privilege of… life.
Geralt with relief sat. Emhyr stood leaning against a carved cabinet.
You saved my daughters life he said. Several times. I thank you for that. On behalf of me and on behalf of my descendants.
You leave me speechless.
Cirilla Emhyr said ignoring the sarcasm is going to Nilfgaard. In due time she will become the Empress. Like dozens of girls who become queens without previously knowing her husband. Often times even without a good concept of the first encounter with their husband. Often they are disappointed by the first few days… and nights of marriage. Cirilla is not the first.
Geralt declined to comment.
Cirilla continued the Emperor will be happy like most of the queens I just spoke about. It will come with time. I will not demand love from her but will transfer it to the son that Cirilla will bear for me. Archduke and future Emperor. An Emperor who will beget a son. A son who will be ruler of the world and who will save the world from destruction. So says the prophecy whose precise content only I know…
The White Flame thought for a moment and continued.
It is clear that Cirilla must never know who I really am. The secret must die. Along with those who know it.
Sure… Geralt nodded. It could not be clearer.
You cannot help noticing Emhyr said after a moment the hand of fate in everything that has happened. All of it. Also in your actions. From the very beginning.
Rather I see the hand of Vilgefortz. It was he who sent you to Cintra right? When you were an enchanted hedgehog? It was he who made Pavetta…
You are shooting in the dark Emhyr interrupted abruptly throwing his salamander cloak over his shoulder. You dont know anything. And you dont need to know. I did not ask you here to relate the story of my life. Nor to explain myself to you. The only thing you deserve is to ensure that the girl will come to no harm. I do not have any debts to you witcher. No…
You! Geralt interrupted. You broke a signed contract. You broke your word! You lied! These are your debts Duny! You broke your oaths as a prince and you have debts as an Emperor. With imperial interest. For ten years!
Is that all?
Thats it. Because that is all that is mine nothing more. But no less! I had to introduce myself to collect the girl when she turned six. I waited on the agreed upon date but you wanted to steal the child before that time. But the fates of which you speak have mocked you. During the next ten years you tired to fight destiny. Now it is your turn you have Ciri your own daughter who you once shamefully deprived of parents and with whom you now want to shamelessly spawn incestuous offspring. You dont ask for her love? Pah you dont have the right to her love! Between us Duny how can you look her in the eyes?
The end justifies the means the Emperor said flatly. I do it for the future of the world. For its salvation.
If you have to save the world like this the witcher lifted his head this world would be better off disappearing. Believe me Duny; it would be better to perish.
You are weak Emhyr var Emreis said gently. Do not get excited you look like youre about to faint.
He moved from the cabinet pulled up a chair and sat down. The witchers head was indeed spinning.
The Iron Hedgehog Emhyr var Emreis said calmly and quietly was a way of forcing my father to cooperate with the usurper to the throne. After the coup my father the Emperor was deposed imprisoned and tortured. He did not break; however because the usurping Duke devised something else – before his eyes he had a hired sorcerer turn his only son into a monster. The sorcerer also had a sense of humour. In our language Emhyr means hedgehog. My father did not break then so he was killed. I was driven by mockery and insults to the forest and chased by dogs. Fortunately they did not pursue me too fiercely because the sorcerer botched the job and from midnight until dawn I returned to human form it saved my life. I was just thirteen years old. I knew several people on whose fidelity I could rely on. But even so I had to flee the country. A crackpot astrologer called Xarthisius had read in the stars that the cure to the spell could be found in the North beyond the Marnadal Steps. Later as the Emperor I gave him in payment for his services a tower and good equipment. At that time he had to work with borrowed equipment. As for what happened at Cintra you already know and I wont waste your time. The truth is that Vilgefortz had nothing to do with it. First I still didnt know him. And second I still felt a deep aversion to sorcerers. To this day I still do not like them. Oh by the way when I reclaimed the throne I apprehended the sorcerer who had served the usurper and who had turned me into a monster in front of my father. I too showed a sense of humour. The sorcerers name was Braathens which in our language is the same as the word fried.
Well enough digression back to the subject at hand. After the birth of Ciri Vilgefortz secretly visited me in Cintra. He introduced himself as a confidant of those who remained faithful to me in Nilfgaard. He offered me his help and soon demonstrated that he could help. When I asked incredulously the motives for his actions he did not deny relying on my gratitude. His plans were to win wealth and power which the future Emperor of Nilfgaard would provide him – me. A mighty ruler who would rule half the world and raise offspring who would dominate the whole world. The wizard bluntly admitted that he wished to achieve a high position. Then he pulled out a scroll tied with snakeskin and acquainted me with the content. So I knew of the prophecy I learned about the future fate of the world and I realised what I must do. And I have come to believe that the end justifies the means.
Of course.
Meanwhile in Nilfgaard Emhyr ignored Geralts comment my business was on track. My supporter had gained more and more influence and had won a group of army officers and cadets over to our side and prepared for a coup. However I was also imperative. In person. The rightful heir to the throne and imperial crown the rightful Emreis of the Emreis lineage. I would be the flag of revolution. Between you and me a lot of revolutionaries harboured a hope that that was all I would be. Those who are still alive still cant get over it. But I digress. I had to go home. It was time that Duny Prince of Maecht and false prince of Cintra claim his heritage. However I had not forgotten about the prophecy. I had to go back there with Ciri. But Calanthe was very carefully looking over my shoulder.
She never trusted you.
I know. I think she knew something about the prophecy. She would do anything to stop me and Cintra was in her power. It was clear I had to go back to Nilfgaard but in a way that no one would know that I was Duny and that Ciri was my daughter. Vilgefortz suggested a way. Duny Pavetta and their child were to die disappear without a trace…
The faked sinking ship.
Right. While sailing from Skellige to Cintra we had been driven by magic to the Sedna Abyss where Vilgefortz pulled our boat into the maelstrom. I Pavetta and Ciri would be closed in a specially protected cabin and survive. The crew…
They would not survive finished the witcher. Then began your journey over the corpses.
It started a little earlier he said after a moment in a dull voice. When it became clear that Ciri was not on board.
Geralt raised his eyebrows.
Alas said the Emperor flatly. I underestimated Pavetta in my plans. This melancholy girl with downcast eye constantly watched me and my intentions. Just before leaving she smuggled our daughter back to the mainland. I raved. She too. She had an attack of hysteria. In the scuffle… she fell overboard. Before I could jump in behind her Vilgefortz pulled the ship into the maelstrom. I hit my head and lost consciousness. I survived only by a miracle caught in the rigging. I woke up and bandaged up. I had a broken arm and…
I wonder said the witcher coldly what a man feels after murdering his wife?
Worse than a mangy dog Emhyr replied promptly. I felt worse than a mangy dog like a true scoundrel. Even the fact that I never loved her didnt change that. The end justified the means. However I regret her death I did not want it and I did not plan it. Pavetta died accidentally.
Youre lying Geralt said dryly and it does not become an Emperor. Pavetta could not live. She would have denounced you. She would never let you do what you intend to do to Ciri.
She would have lived Emhyr contradicted him. Somewhere else… Somewhere far away. There are many remote castles… perhaps Darn Rowan… I would not have killed her…
Even for the purpose that justifies the means?
Always the Emperor rubbed his forehead you use a less drastic solution. There are always many options available.
Not always said the witcher looking into his eyes. Emhyr avoided his gaze.
Just what I thought Geralt nodded. Finish your story. Time is running out.
Calanthe guarded her granddaughter like the apple of her eye. I could not even dream of kidnap… My relationship with Vilgefortz had cooled considerably and I still held a grudge against other sorcerers… But the military and aristocracy were pushing me to go to war encouraging me to attack Cintra. The nation needed living space and the voxpopuli would consider this my test as Emperor. I decided to kill two birds with one stone. I would take in one fell swoop Cintra and Ciri. The rest you know.
Yes I know said Geralt. Thanks for the chat Duny. Appreciate that you take the time but lets not wait any longer. I am very tired. Ive seen the death of friends who followed me here from the end of the world. To save your daughter. They did not even know her; except for Cahir; none of them had seen her. They came to save her because there was something in them that was worthy and noble. And for what? To find death. I dont think that is fair. And if anyone is interested Im not satisfied. Because a story in which good people die and the rogues live is bullshit. I have no more strength Emperor. Call your men.
Witcher…
The secret must die along with those who know it you said so yourself. You have no other way out. There are no other solutions. If I escape from prison Ill come for Ciri. It is the price I must pay and you know it.
I know it.
You can spare Yennefers life. She does not know the secret.
She Emhyr said seriously would pay any price to take my Ciri. And to avenge your death.
True said the witcher. I almost forgot how much she loves the girl. Youre right Duny. We cannot escape our destiny. I have a request…
Im listening.
Let me say goodbye to both of them. Then I am at your disposal.
Emhyr stood up walked to the window and stared out the dark portal.
I cannot deny this. But…
Do not worry; I wont say anything to Ciri. It would hurt her severely if I told her who you are. And I cannot hurt her.
After a long silence Emhyr turned from the window.
Maybe I do have some debt to you he turned on his heel. Listen to what I have to offer. Once long ago when people still valued truth honour and pride they stood behind their words and feared only shame it would happen that a person sentenced to death could escape humiliation by being handed a dagger or razor and stepping into a tub of warm water and opening a vein. Do you think that…
Command a tub to be filled.
Do you believe the Emperor said quietly that the Lady Yennefer would accompany you in the tub?
Im pretty sure. But I will have to ask. She has quite a rebellious nature.
I know.
Yennefer agreed without hesitation.
Full circle she said staring speculatively at her wrist. Uroboros is biting his own tail.
I dont understand Ciri spluttered like an angry cat I dont see why I should go with him! Why? Where are you going?
My daughter Yennefer said quietly. This is your destiny. Youll see it cannot be otherwise.
And you?
Us Yennefer looked at Geralt a different destiny awaits us. Nor can it be otherwise. Come to me my daughter. Hold me tight.
They want to kill you! I will not allow it! After all we have only just been reunited! This is not fair!
He who lives by the sword Emhyr var Emreis said dully dies by the sword. They both fought with me and lost. But they lose with dignity.
Ciri in three steps stood before him Geralt silently gasped. He heard Yennefer sigh.
Bloody hell he thought anyone can see it! Everyone in the Black Ones army will see it! The same attitude the same sparkling eyes the same gesture with her mouth the way she crosses her arms over her chest. Fortunately she inherited her mothers ashen mane. But even so those who arent blind can see whose blood she is.
You Ciri said directing an angry look at Emhyr. You won. And you think you won with dignity?
Emhyr var Emreis did not respond. He just smiled and eyed the angry girl. Ciri clenched her teeth.
So many dead so many dead for this end? And they lost with honour? Death is an honour? Only a beast would think so. I have looked at death up close and have not become a beast. And it will never happen.
He did not answer. He looked at her seeming to drink her in.
I know she hissed what you are up to. What you want to do with me. Ill tell you now – I will not let you touch me. And if you do… Ill kill you. Even if tied up. When you sleep Ill bite through your throat…
The Emperor with a quick gesture silenced the murmuring of his officers.
This will happen he drawled not taking his eyes from Ciri as intended. Say goodbye to your friends Cirilla Fiona Elen Riannon.
Ciri looked at the witcher Geralt made a dismissive motion with his head. The girl sighed. She hugged Yennefer and they whispered together for a long time. Ciri then approached Geralt.
A pity she said quietly. It seemed that everything was beginning to improve.
It seemed to be so said the witcher.
They embraced.
Be brave.
He will not have me she whispered. He will not have me dont worry. I will escape him. I know a way…
Do not kill him. Remember Ciri. You cannot!
Fear not I didnt even think about it. You know Geralt Ive had enough of killing. There has been altogether too much.
Too much. Goodbye witcheress.
Goodbye witcher.
Dont cry.
That is easy for you to say.
Emhyr var Emreis Emperor of Nilfgaard escorted the witcher and the sorceress to the bath chamber to a large marble bathtub filled with warm fragrant water.
Goodbye he said. Take your time. Im leaving but I will leave people her to carry out my orders. When you are ready call out. A Lieutenant will bring a knife. But as I said do not rush.
We appreciate it Yennefer said seriously. Imperial Majesty?
Im listening.
I would ask you not to hurt my daughter. I do not want to die with the notion that she is crying.
Emhyr was silent for a time. A very long time. He bowed his head and leaned on the door.
Lady Yennefer he finally said an unreadable expression on his face. You can be sure that I will not hurt yours and Geralts daughter. I have trampled the corpses of people and danced on the barrows of my enemies. I thought that was all I could look forward to. But your suspicions are unfounded - will never be able to hurt her. I know that now. Thank you to you both. Goodbye.
He walked out of the bath chamber and quietly closed the door. Geralt sighed.
Should we undress? He looked at the steam rising above the tub. Id hate for them to pull me out as a naked corpse…
I imagine it does not matter how they pull us out Yennefer pulled off her shoes and socks and with quick movement began to unbutton her dress. Even though this is my last hour I will not bathe dressed.
She pulled her shirt over her head and jumped into the tub splashing the water.
Well Geralt? Why are you standing like a statue?
Because I had forgotten how beautiful you are.
Youre very forgetful. Now get in the water.
When he sat down beside her she immediately threw her arms around his neck. He kissed her stroking her waist above the water and under it.
Is this he asked for the record the right time?
For this she murmured dipping one hand under the water and touching him every time is appropriate. Emhyr repeated twice that we were not to rush. What better way to spend the last few moments we have been given? Why mourn and lament? Its not worth it. Why examine our consciences? It is stupid and trivial.
Thats not what I meant.
Then what?
If the water cools down he murmured caressing her breasts then the cuts will be painful.
For pleasure Yennefer dipped a second hand below the water it is worth paying a little pain. Are you afraid of pain?
No.
Me neither. Come sit on the edge. I love you but I will not damn it dive.
Oh oh… said Yennefer tilting her head so that he wet hair arched over her back.
Wow…
I love you Yen.
I love you too Geralt.
Its time. Lets call.
Lets call.
They called out. First the witcher called and then the sorceress after him. When they received no response the shouted in unison.
We are ready! Give us the knife! Hey! Damn it! The water is cooling!
Then get out of it Ciri said peering into the bath chamber. Theyre all gone.
What?
Yes. They are all gone. Besides the three of us there is not a soul here. Get dressed. You look awfully ridiculous naked.
As they dressed their hands began to tremble. Both of them. With utmost difficulty they dealt with the buckles hooks and buttons. Ciri chattered.
They are gone. Except for ourselves. Each and every one of them. They took all the prisoners mounted their horses and left. They left no one behind.
They left no one?
Nobody.
Incomprehensible Geralt shook his head. I dont understand it.
And nothing happened Yennefer cleared her throat to explain this?
No Ciri replied quickly nothing.
She lied.
At first she had tried to appear fine. Erect proud head held high and her face impassive while being pushed into the gloved hands of the Black knights while throwing bold and challenging looks and those helmets which made her so afraid. No one was touching her now after the officer with the silver ornament on his helm growled at his officers.
She walked between two rows of soldiers who escorted her to the gate. Their boots stomped loudly their chainmail clinked and their weapons rattled.
After advancing a few steps she looked back for the first time a little time later; she did it a second time. She would never see them again anymore she suddenly realised with terrifying clarity.
Neither Geralt nor Yennefer. Never again.
That awareness in one fell swoop wiped away her fake mask of courage. Ciris face contracted and contorted her eyes filled with tears and her nose ran. The girl fought with all her might but in vain. A wave broke the dam as the tears made an appearance.
The Nilfgaardians in salamander cloaks looked on silently. And amazed. Some had seen her on the stairs covered in blood had seen her talking with the Emperor. A witcheress with a sword who was defying the Emperor himself. And now they were stunned seeing a simple girl crying and sobbing.
She was aware of their gazes. Their eyes were burning like fire prickling her skin. She struggled but to no avail. The more she tried to restrain herself the more she cried.
She slowed and then stopped. The escort also stopped. But only for a moment. A grouchy officer grabbed her with iron hard hands under her arms. Ciri glanced over her shoulder again. She offered no resistance. But wailed louder more desperate.
The Emperor Emhyr var Emreis stopped this dark man whose face had awakened strange and confusing memories. With a sharp order he ordered her loose. Ciri sniffed and wiped her eyes with her sleeve. Seeing the Emperor approach he stifled a sob and proudly raised her head. Although even at the time she realised how ridiculous she must look.
Emhyr watched her for a long time. Without a word. Then he approached and reached for her.
Ciri whose reactions to such movements were to instinctively recoil did not react this time to her surprise. Even greater was her surprise to find that the contact with this man was not distasteful.
He touched her hair as if to count the snowy strings. He touched her cheek his fingertips running along the old scar. Then he hugged her cuddling her close to his chest stroking the back of her head. And she shaking and crying uncontrollably let him.
A strange thing fate she heard him whisper faintly. Goodbye my daughter.
What did he say?
Ciris face clouded.
He said Va Faill luned. In the elder speech – Goodbye my daughter.
I know Yennefer nodded. What happened then?
Then… Then he let me go he turned around and walked away. He shouted orders. And they all left. They passed me quite indifferently stomping pounding and rattling in their armour out the gate. I heard neighing and galloping. I d… dont understand. Although if you think about it…
Ciri.
What?
Do not think.
Castle Stygga repeated Philippa Eilhart looking out from under her long eyelashes at Fringilla Vigo.
Fringilla did not blush. In the last three months she had been able to product a magic cream which acted on blood vessels. Thanks to that cream the blush on her face didnt show and no one could know that she was ashamed.
Vilgefortz was hiding in castle Stygga Assire var Anahid confirmed. It is in Ebbing on the shore of a mountain lake whose name my informant a common soldier cannot remember.
You used the past tense Francesca Findabair said.
Correct Philippa took control again. Because Vilgefortz is dead my dear colleague. He and his companions are dead. This service was provided by our good friend the witcher Geralt of Rivia. Obviously we underestimated him. We all do. We made a mistake. We all do. Some more than others.
All the sorceresses as if on command looked at Fringilla but the cream was working reliably. Assire var Anahid sighed. Philippa slapped her hand on the table.
Although it may seem like an excuse she said dryly our activities associated with the war and the preparation of the peace negotiations and the fact that the Lodge was not involved with the case and final solution of Vilgefortz have to be considered as a failure on our part. Something like this must not be repeated dear ladies.
The Lodge – except for Fringilla who was pale as a corpse – shook their heads.
At the moment Philippa said Witcher Geralt is somewhere in Ebbing. Along with Yennefer and Ciri. We will need to consider how to find them…
And the castle? Sabrina Glevissig interrupted. Have you forgotten to do something about that Philippa?
No I have not forgotten. If there is going to be a legend one must have the proper version and one in our favour. Ill entrust this task to you Sabrina. Take Keira and Triss and take care of it. See that no trace is left.
The explosion was heard in Maecht the flash – because it happened at night – was visible even in Metinna and Geso. A series of earthquakes caused by the explosion were felt even further. In virtually all corners of the world.
Congreve Estella vel Stella – The daughter of Otto of Congreve married to the old Count Liddertal. Upon the death of the latter rapidly recovered managed her inheritance most judiciously amassing for herself a not inconsiderable fortune. Enjoying the esteem of the emperor Emhyr var Emreis (sic) she was considered a person of great importance by the court. While she had no official duties it was generally believed that the emperor was in the habit of paying considerable attention to her words and opinions. Because of her close personal relationship with the young Empress Cirilla Fiona (sic) whom she loved like her own daughter she was jokingly referred to as the Imperial mother-in-law. She outlived both the Emperor and the Empress and died in 1331; as to her huge fortune it fell to distant relatives on the Liddertal side of the family called the Whites; being stupid and short-sighted they squandered every bit of their inheritance.
Effenberg and Talbot
Encyclopaedia Maxima Mundi Tome III
CHAPTER TEN
The man stealthily approaching the camp was very clever and cunning. His position changed quickly and he moved silently and swiftly so that his approach would not be noticed by anyone. Anyone but Boreas Mun. Boreas was very skilful in approaching manoeuvres.
Show yourself stranger he called making sure to make his voice sound confident and bold. Your tricks wont work on me. I can see you out there!
One of the boulders on the hillside against the starry sky moved and turned into the silhouette of a human figure.
Boreas turned the spit roast as the meat was burning. Pretending to comfortably support himself he put his hand on the grip of his bow.
My property is not worth much he said in a calm tone with a thread of warning. I only have a few things but I do not intend to lose them. I will defend them to the death.
Im not a thief said the deep voice of the man hiding among the rocks. I am a pilgrim.
The pilgrim was tall and robust measuring almost seven feet and Boreas noticed quite the stomach on him. He held a cane in his hand that was a thick as a pole carts and looked like an ordinary pilgrim stick. Boreas Mun wondered how suck a big hulking man could move with such agility.
He became concerned. His bow a composite bow with seventy pounds of pressure which could dispatch an elk at a hundred paces suddenly seemed like a fragile childs toy.
I am a pilgrim the figure repeated. I have no evil…
The other one Boreas interrupted sharply can come out too!
What other… The pilgrim stuttered and stopped seeing from the darkness on the opposite side of the fire emerge a slim noiseless shadow.
This time Boreas Mun was surprised. The other man was an elf – his expert trackers eye detected it right away by the way he moved. And being surprised by an elf had no shame.
I apologise the elf said his voice slightly hoarse. I did not hide from the two of you out of malice but out of caution. Um Id recommend you turn the spit a bit.
Hes right said the stranger leaning on his cane and sniffing audibly. The way the meat smells its over done.
Boreas turned the spit sighed cleared his throat and sighed again.
Gentlemen please sit down he said finally. Wait a few minutes and the roast will be done. I say it is a knave who refuses hospitality to pilgrims on the road.
Grease dripped into the fire and the flame blazed brighter. The pilgrim wore a felt hat with a wide brim which hid his face quite effectively in shadow. The elf wore around his head a colourful scarf which did not hide his face. When they saw him in the firelight the tracker and the pilgrim winced. They made no sound just held their breaths at the sight of his face which was once beautifully elven but now was disfigured by an ugly scar that ran diagonally across his forehead brow nose and cheek to chin.
Boreas Mun grunted and turned the spit again.
The smell he did not ask but made a statement of fact is what attracted you to my camp.
Indeed said the pilgrim with the hat I dont want to brag but I smelled your roast at quite a distance. But I kept a proper vigilance. The fire that I approached yesterday the ragged savages were roasting a woman.
That is true said the elf. The next morning I found human bones in the ashes.
The next morning? The tall pilgrim repeated.
How long have you been following in my footsteps my Lord elf?
A long time.
What kept you from revealing your presence?
Caution.
The Elskerdeg Pass Boreas Mun said turning the spit and breaking the awkward silence does not enjoy the best reputation. I have also seen bones in fires corpses on stakes and hanging from trees. In the surrounding mountains are hidden outlaws outcasts and the followers of perverted cults. And creatures who only see a man by himself as food. Supposedly.
Not supposedly said the elf. Definitely. And the further east you go into the mountains the worse it gets.
Are you also headed east? For Elskerdeg? To Zerrikania? Or even further to Haakland?
Neither the pilgrim or the elf answered. Boreas Mun didnt really expect it. First the question was indiscreet. Second it was stupid. From where they were standing it was only possible to head east. Through the Elskerdeg Pass. Where he was headed.
The roast is ready Boreas with a deft movement which was also intended as a warning flicked open a butterfly knife. Come gentlemen dont be shy.
The pilgrim took out a hunting knife and the elf a stiletto which was by no means a kitchen implement. All three however used their blades to cut the food. For some time all that could be heard was the crunch and crackle of eating and the sizzle of bones thrown into the fire.
The pilgrim belched dignifiedly.
Interesting animal the pilgrim said looking at the shoulder that he had just cleaned as if he had spent three days in an anthill. The taste reminds me of lamb but it was a tender as a rabbit… I do not remember ever having eaten anything like it before.
That was a skrekk the elf said while crushing a bone between his teeth. But it does not resemble anything I have ever eaten.
Boreas quietly cleared his throat. The barely perceptible undercurrent of amusement in the elfs voice proved that he knew that he was eating a huge mountain rat with blood red eyes and sharp incisors whose tail measured one and a half cubits. The tracker was not going to catch the giant rodent but shot it in self-defence. He then however decided to roast it.
He was a wise man the thought coldly. He never would have eaten a rat that fed on garbage and waste. But the nearest community to the Elskerdeg Pass that was able to produce waste was over three hundred miles away. The rat - or the skrekk as the elf had called it - has been clean and healthy. It had no contact with civilization. Therefore it had not been dirty or carrying disease.
Finally they finished the last of the meat the ribs and bones went into the fire. The moon rose over the jagged peaks of the mountains. The wind fanned the flames and sparks flew they would die off between the myriad of twinkling stars.
Have you gentlemen been on the road long? Boreas Mun allowed himself another indiscreet question. How long since you went through the Solveig Gate?
Long ago or recently said the pilgrim. What does it matter? I passed through Solveig two days after Septembers full moon.
For me it has been six days said the elf.
Ha the tracker said emboldened by their answers. Im surprised that we did not meet there because I was passing through at the same time. But I was on a horse.
He paused quenching gloomy thoughts and memories of his horse and its loss. He was sure that his casual companions had similar adventures. They could not have travelled the whole way on foot to catch him here in the vicinity of Elskerdeg.
I gather he continued that you gentlemen started travelling just after the war and after the conclusion of the peace of Cintra. Naturally I dont care but I dare to presume that you gentlemen were not satisfied with the order of things established at Cintra.
Silence reigned for a long time around the fire but was eventually broken by the distant howl. A wolf probably although around the Elskerdeg Pass you could never be sure of anything.
To be honest the elf said unexpectedly I found after the peace of Cintra there was no reason why the world should love me. Or me the new layout.
My own case said the pilgrim crossing his arms over his powerful chest. Was the same. Although I learned of it as a friend of mine says post factum.
There was a long silence. The howling had ceased in the pass.
In the beginning continued the pilgrim although Boreas and the elf were convinced that he would not everything pointed to the fact that the peace of Cintra would bring changes for the better and set tolerable living conditions for this world. If not for all at least for some…
The kings grunted Boreas travelled to Cintra in April if I recall.
Exactly April second said the pilgrim. I remember it was the new moon.
Along the entire wall located under dark beams within a gallery hung a row of shields with the colourful figures of heraldic emblems and the coats of arms of the nobility of Cintra.
One glance was enough to detect the difference between the old faded coats of arms of the nobility of Cintra and the newly promoted families from the reign of Dagorad and Calanthe.
The latter had vibrant colours which had not yet faded and you could not detect the slightest sign of woodworm.
However the most intense colours appeared on the shields that had been put up most recently those with the coat of arms of the Nilfgaardian nobles. Those who had distinguished themselves during the conquest of the country and had proven themselves during the five year imperial administration.
Once we again hold Cintra thought King Foltest we will need to ensure that these coat of arms are not destroyed in a fervour of restoration. Politics is one thing aesthetics another.
Changes to a regime do not justify vandalism.
So this is where it all began thought Dijkstra looking around the large hall. The famous engagement feast during which appeared an iron hedgehog demanding Princess Pavettas hand… And Queen Calanthe hired a witcher…
How amazing are the interwoven fates of humans thought the spy surprised by the banality of his own thoughts.
Its been five years thought Queen Meve. Five years ago the blood and brains of Calanthe the Lioness of Cintra exploded on the flagstones of that courtyard which I can see through this window. Calanthe whose portrait we saw proudly hanging in the foyer the last of the royal bloodline. After her daughter Pavetta drowned she was left with only her granddaughter Cirilla. And if it is true that Cirilla also died…
Please Cyrus Engelkind Hemmelfart the hierarch of Novigrad waved his trembling hand. By virtue of his age position and widespread respect he was to preside over the discussions. To your places please.
They sat at a round table where the seats were identified by mahogany tablets. Meve Queen of Rivia and Lyria. Foltest King of Temeria and his vassal King Venzlav of Brugge. Demavend King of Aedirn. Henselt King of Kaedwen. Ethan King of Cidaris. The young King Kistrin of Verden. The Duke Nitert head of the regency council of Redania. And the Earl Dijkstra.
We should seek to get rid of this spy and remove him from the table of discussions thought the hierarch. King Henselt and King Foltest and even young King Kistrin have already allowed themselves a few sour comments to our Nilfgaardian representatives. This Sigismund Dijkstra is a person of dubious origins with an unacceptable past and reputation. We cannot afford to have such a person distorting the atmosphere of the deliberations.
The head of the Nilfgaardian delegation Baron Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen who sat at the round table directly opposite Dijkstra greeted the spy with a curt diplomatic bow. Seeing that everyone was already seated the hierarch of Novigrad also sat. Not without the help of a few pages that held his trembling hands. The hierarch sat on a chair made years ago for Queen Calanthe. The chair had a beautifully carved backing towering over the other chairs.
Even though this was a round table it was known who was the boss.
So it was here thought Triss Merigold looking around the room looking at the tapestries painting and numerous hunting trophies. Here in this room after the devastation of the throne room a memorable conversation took place between Calanthe the witcher Pavetta and an enchanted hedgehog. Here the Queen agreed to a strange marriage. After all the princess was already pregnant and Ciri was born less than eight months later… Ciri the heiress to the throne the young lion with the Lionesss blood… Ciri my little sister. Who is now apparently far away to the south. Fortunately no longer alone she is with Geralt and Yennefer. Shes safe.
Unless they have lied to me again.
Take a seat ladies Philippa Eilhart said who Triss had been watching suspiciously for some time. The sovereigns of the world will in a moment begin to recite their inaugural speeches. I would not want us to miss a single word.
The sorceresses interrupting their gossip and quickly took their seats. Sile de Tancarville wore a silver boa a feminine accent to her austere black outfit. Assire var Anahid was dressed in a violet silk dress which was graceful and combined simplicity and modest elegance. Francesca Findabair was majestic as ever. Ida Emean aep Sivney was mysterious as usual. Margarita Laux-Antille was dignified and serious. Sabrina Glevissig was adorned with turquoise. Keira Metz was dressed in green and lemon yellow. And Fringilla Vigo - Depressed sad pale morbid and with a literally corpse-like pallor.
Triss sat next to Keira and opposite Fringilla. On the wall behind the Nilfgaardian witch was a picture of a rider galloping down an alley of alders. The trees limbs reached towards the rider and their black cavities that served as mouths laughed. Triss shivered involuntary.
Set in the middle of the table was a telecommunicator. Philippa with a spell adjusted the image and sound.
As you can see and hear she said somewhat bitterly in Cintras throne room just below us on the ground floor the sovereigns of the world are about to decide its fate. And we here one floor above them will watch to make sure they dont make a mistake.
The howling in the pass was joined by other voices. Now Boreas had no doubt they were certainly wolves.
I too he said trying to encourage more conversation did not expect much from these negotiations in Cintra. The truth is that no one I know counted on these negotiations bringing anything good.
The important thing was said the pilgrim that the negotiations had begun. The common man for thats what I consider myself to be were well aware that the warring kings and emperor would destroy each other if they could relentlessly. To stop the killing and sit down around the table. It meant that they no longer had the strength. They were simply speaking powerless. And that powerlessness meant that no soldiers would kill the common man burn his house kill his children rape his women or sell his whole family into slavery. No instead they gathered in Cintra and negotiated. Let us rejoice!
The elf looked up from the burning logs which he was prodding with a stick.
Even the common man he said with obvious sarcasm even in his moments of joy should know that politics is also a war only by other means. It should also be understood that such negotiations are merely a form of trade. It is conducted in an identical manner. Success in negotiation is based on concessions obtained. Something is given something is lost. In other words in order to buy something something must be sold.
Indeed. The pilgrim said after a moment. Something so plain and obvious can be understood by even the simplest of men.
No no a thousand times no! Cried King Henselt smashing his two fists into the tabletop overturning his drink and making the inkwell jump. I will not hear any more discussions about it! No more haggling! No more I say deiraedh!
Henselt Foltest said quietly in a conciliatory tone dont hinder. And do not embarrass us by screaming in front of His Excellency.
Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen the negotiator on behalf of the Empire of Nilfgaard bowed with a false smile that suggested that the antics of the King of Kaedwen did not irritate or ultimately interest him.
Are we going to start attacking each other continued Foltest like a pack of rabid dogs? Shame on you Henselt.
We have made arrangements with Nilfgaard in the thorny matter of Dol Angra said Dijkstra. It would be foolish…
I resent such comments! Roared Henselt so loud he could have competed with a buffalo. I resent such rude comments particularly from some fucking spy! I am the fucking anointed King!
It cant be seen at first glance Meve muttered.
Demavend turned away from looking at the shields on the rooms walls smiling with distain as if not concerned about the future of his kingdom.
Enough! Wheezed Henselt his eyes rolling. Enough by the gods. As I said I wont give up an inch of land. Not one not a single claim! I do not agree to the depletion of my kingdom by even a span not even half an inch of earth! The gods have entrusted me with Kaedwen and therefore I would only be willing to surrender it to the gods! The Lower Marches is my territory… It has for centuries…
Upper Aedirn Dijkstra spoke again has only been part of Kaedwen since last summer. More specifically from the twenty-fourth of July last year. From the moment that Kaedwen sent in occupational forces.
I ask said Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen that it be recorded ad futuram rei memoriam that the Empire of Nilfgaard had nothing to do with this annexation.
Except that at that time you were plundering Vengerberg.
Nihil ad rem!
Really?
Gentlemen! Foltest admonished.
The Kaedwen army fumed Henselt entered the Lower Marches as liberators! My soldiers were greeted with flowers! My soldiers…
Your bandits said Demavend calmly but his face betrayed the effort it cost to stay calm. Your bandits invaded my kingdom murdered raped and looted. Lady and gentlemen we are gathered here for a week to discuss the future of the world. By the gods is it to be the face of crime and looting? Should it be maintained in the lawless status quo? Should stolen goods remain in the hands of thugs and robbers?
Henselt grabbed a map from the table tore it in two and with a rapid movement threw it at Demavend. The King of Aedirn did not even move.
My armies Henselt spluttered his face turning the colour of a well aged wine won the Marches from the Nilfgaardians. Your pitiful reign at that time was already in the past Demavend. You probably dont realise but if not for my troops you would not even be ruling today. Id like to see how youd drive the Black Ones back over the Yaruga without my help. Without exaggeration I can say that you are only a king because of my kindness. But now my kindness ends! I will not let my kingdom be depleted!
Neither will I Demavend stood. We will never reach an agreement!
Gentlemen in conciliatory tone Cyrus the hierarch who until then had been dozing spoke. No doubt we can always reach some compromise…
The Empire of Nilfgaard said Shilard does not intend to accept any solution that would harm the country of the elves of Dol Blathanna. If necessary My Lords I will re-read the content of the memorandum…
Henselt Foltest and Dijkstra snorted but Demavend looked at the Imperial ambassador calmly almost benevolently.
For the good of the people he said and to maintain the peace I acknowledge the autonomy of Dol Blathanna. But not as a kingdom rather as a duchy. The condition is that the Duchess Enid an Gleanna pay me homage and is committed to the equality of elves and humans rights and privileges. I am willing to do this pro bono.
Here said Meve are the words of a true king.
Salus publica lex suprema est added hierarch Hemmelfart who for some time had sought for an opportunity to boast of his knowledge of diplomatic vocabulary.
I would like to add however Demavend continued looking at the bloated Henselt that Dol Blathannas concession is not a precedent. This is the only breach of the integrity of my lands that I will accept. I will not recognise any additional distributions. The army of Kaedwen which breached my boarders as an aggressor and occupier has one week to leave the fortresses and castles that they have illegally occupied in Upper Aedirn. That is the condition for me to continue to take part in these negotiations. And verba volant my secretary will add an official protocol in that sense.
Henselt? Foltest gave him a questioning look.
Never! bellowed the King of Kaedwen overturning his chair and jumping like a chimpanzee stung by a hornet. I will never give up the Marches! Youll have to go over my corpse! I will not give it up! Nothing can force me! Nothing! Over my dead body!
And to prove that he was a scholar he shouted.
Non possumus!
Ill give him non possumus the fool! Snapped Sabrina Glevissig in the chamber one floor above. Dont worry ladies Im going to make this stubborn fool surrender Upper Aedirn. His army will leave within ten days it is clear. There is no question about it. If any of you ladies doubt this I have a right to feel offended.
Philippa Eilhart and Sile de Tancarville expressed their appreciation by bowing. Assire var Anahid thanked her with a smile.
Let us return to the problem of Dol Blathanna said Sabrina. We know the content of the memorandum of Emperor Emhyr. The kings down there have not have time to thoroughly discuss this issue but they have already hinted at their approaches. The king whose voice carries most interest you might say is King Demavend.
Demavends position Sile adjusted the fur boa around her neck can be described as extremely helpful. I consider his position to be thoughtful and balanced. Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen will be no small trouble trying to argue in the direction of greater concessions. I dont know whether it can be done.
It will be said Assire var Anahid. Such are his instructions. The presentation of an official note will have them tangling for at least a day. After that time he will begin to make concessions.
That is the normal procedure said Sabrina. According to him they want to meet in a separate negotiation and come to an agreement. Thats what we expect. Well decide how much well allow. Francesca! Speak! After all this is about your country.
That is why said the Daisy of the Valley with a smile I am silent Sabrina.
Break your pride please Margarita Laux-Antille asked seriously. We really need to know what we can allow the kings.
Francesca Findabair smiled more beautifully.
For the cause of peace and pro bon public she said. I agree with the proposal of King Demavend. From now on my dear friends you can stop titling me Your Majesty Your Grace will be enough.
Elven jokes said Sabrina. I never laugh probably because I dont understand them. What about Demavends remaining requirements?
Francesca blinked.
I agree with the repatriation of the settlers and the restitution of their property she said gravely. I guarantee equal rights for all races…
By the gods Philippa Eilhart laughed dont be so accommodating! Submit your own terms!
I will the elf suddenly turned serious. I will not pay tribute to the Aedirn king. I want Dol Blathanna to be a freehold. Without the bond of vassalage beyond the pledge of allegiance and not to act against the sovereign.
Demavend will not accept this Philippa said laconically. He will not give us the profits and revenues from the Valley of Flowers.
On that issue Francesca raised her eyebrows I am willing to engage in bilateral negotiations Im sure we can reach a consensus. A freehold is not required to pay tribute but payment is not necessarily prohibited or excluded.
And what about succession rights? Asked Philippa. What about the right of primogeniture? Agreeing to a freehold Demavend will require guarantees of the indivisibility of the Principality.
Demavend Francesca smiled again may be fooled by my skin and figure but you surprise me Philippa. It has been a long long time since I passed the age of being able to get pregnant. As far as birthrights and succession Demavend has nothing to fear. I am the ultimus familiae of the royal house of Dol Blathanna. However despite the age difference between me and Demavend I will not be dealing with him but his grandchildrens great-grandchildren. I assure you ladies that in this respect there are no disputes.
In this no said Assire var Anahid looking the elven sorceress in the eyes. But what about the Squirrels? What about the elves that fought on the side of the Empire? If Im not mistaken Lady Enid they are most of your subjects?
The Daisy of the Valley stopped smiling. She looked at Ida Emean the elf from the Blue Mountains.
Pro bono public… she began but did not finish. Assire nodded her head seriously indicating that she understood.
What can we do? She said slowly. Everything has its price. War requires sacrifice. As it turns out so does peace.
It cannot be denied the pilgrim said looking thoughtfully at the elf who sat motionless with his head down. Peace negotiation are like a flea market. A bazaar. To buy something others must be sold. Thats how the world works. The point is not to buy something that is too expensive…
Or to sell for too cheap finished the elf not raising his head.
Traitors! Vile bastards!
Sons of bitches!
Anbadraigh aen cuach!
Nilfgaardian dogs!
Silence! Hamilcar Danza yelled banging his fist on the railing of the porch.
The crossbowmen in the gallery turned their weapons on the elves who crowded in the cul de sac.
Peace! Danza yelled even louder. Enough! Shut up officers! More dignity!
You have the audacity to talk about dignity scoundrel? Shouted Coinneach Da Reo.
We spilled blood for you cursed Dhoine! This is how you repay us? You send us to the oppressors of the North? As if we were criminals? Murderers?
I said enough! Danza thumped his fist into the railing again. Lets be very clear about one thing gentlemen! The agreements signed in Cintra which were recorded as the conditions of peace impose an obligation on the Empire by the Nordlings to issue war criminals…
Criminals? Shouted Riordain. Criminals? You filthy Dhoine!
War criminals Danza repeated carefully ignoring the shouts and clamour of the encircled elves. Those officers who are accused of terrorism killing civilians the torture of prisoners massacring the wounded in hospitals…
You sons of bitches! Shouted Angus Bri Cri. We killed because we were at war!
We killed following your orders!
Cuachte aep ass bloede dhoine!
The decision is made! Danza insisted. Your insults and cries will not change anything. Please individually approach the guardhouse please do not resist when being put into chains.
We had to stay behind while they fled to the Yaruga Riordain gritted his teeth. We had to stay and fight as commandos. We were fools gullible fools we wanted to keep our military oath. Well now we will!
Isengrim Faoiltiarna the Steel Wolf the legendary leader of the Squirrels and now an imperial colonel tore the silver rays of the Vrihedd brigade from his sleeves and threw them on the patio. Other officers followed suit. Hamilcar Danza who was watching from the gallery frowned.
This demonstration is unnecessary he said. In your place I would not so rashly abandon the imperial insignia. It is my duty to inform you that the negotiated peace will guarantee a fair trial mild sentences and early amnesty for imperial…
The cul de sac of elves burst into a grim laugh thundering between the stone walls.
Furthermore I want to warn you Hamilcar Danza said curtly that we will only send thirty-two officers to the Nordlings. We will not surrender any of the soldiers who you commanded not one.
The laughter ceased as if cut by a knife.
The wind blew on the fire sending up a shower of sparks and smoke which filled the eyes. They heard a howl from the pass.
With the trade the elf said breaking the silence everything was for sale. Honour loyalty a nobles oath common decency… simple goods have value only as long as there is demand for them. If there was not then it was thrown in the dustbin.
On the rubbish heap of history; said the pilgrim. Youre right sir elf. Thats what I found there in Cintra. Everything had a price. And was worth as much as what you could get in return. Each morning began like a stock market. And like a real stock market sudden ups and downs were continuously occurring. It was difficult to escape the impression that someone else was pulling the strings.
Did I hear you right? Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen asked slowly his tone and facial expression giving the impression of mistrust. Are my ears deceiving me?
Berengar Leuvaarden special envoy of the emperor did not bother to respond. He leaned back in his chair holding his cup of wine which he rocked rhythmically from side to side.
Fitz-Oesterlen was offended; he then put on a mask of contempt.
Either youre lying you son of a bitch or you want to dupe me. Either way Ive uncovered you. So Im to understand he sniffed that after far-reaching concessions on borders war captives the recovery of loot on the question of the Vrihedd brigade officers and Scoiatael commandos the emperor commands me to reach an agreement and accept the impossible demands of the Nordlings regarding the repatriation of settlers?
You understand perfectly Ambassador said Leuvaarden characteristically dragging out his syllables. Indeed I am full of admiration for your comprehension.
The Great Sun Lord Leuvaarden do you in the capital ever meditate on the consequences of your decisions? The Nordlings are already whispering that our empire is a colossus with feet of clay! Even now they cry out that they won beat us and drove us out! Does the Emperor realise that to give further concession will mean accepting their arrogant and unreasonable ultimatum? Does the Emperor understand that they will treat this as a sign of weakness which could have dire consequences in the future? Does the Emperor understand finally the fate of several thousand of our settlers in Brugge and Lyria?
Berengar Leuvaarden stopped rocking his cup and stared at Shilard his eyes as black as coal.
I have given My Lord Baron an imperial order he said. When the Baron returns to Nilfgaard he can personally ask the Emperor why he issued such unreasonable orders. He may also want to reprimand the Emperor. Scold him. Why not? But alone without my mediation.
Oh thought Shilard. I know. Sitting here before me is a new Stefan Skellen. And Ill have to deal with him just like Skellen. But it is clear he did not come here for no reason. The order could have been brought by a regular messenger.
Well he said outwardly calm and confident. Woe to the vanquished. The imperial order is clear and specific I will therefore execute it. I will do everything to make it look like the outcome of negotiations and not complete defeatism. I understand these things; Ive been a diploma for thirty years. And my family for four generations. We are a significant influential and rich…family…
I know I know of course Leuvaarden interrupted with a smile. Thats why Im here.
Shilard bowed slightly and waited patiently.
My dear Baron began the envoy rocking his cup again your difficulties in understanding the imperial order arose because you surmised that the victory in the war is inextricably bound up with an absurd waste of material resources and human lives and is achieved by someone waving a flag and shouting Everything I see is mine! I won! A similar opinion is unfortunately fairly widespread. But for me and the people who have put their trust in me we dont think so. Victory is supposed to look like this – the defeated have to buy goods from the winners and do it gladly because the goods of the winners are better and cheaper. The winners currency is stronger than the currency of the defeated and the vanquished and they begin to have more confidence in their own. Do you understand me Baron Fitz-Oesterlen? Are you slowly beginning to distinguish the winners from the losers?
Ambassador Fitz-Oesterlen nodded to confirm.
But in order to strengthen and legitimise the victory Leuvaarden said dragging out his syllables a peace must be signed. A soon as possible and at any cost. Not a ceasefire or truce but a real lasting peace. A strong contract that will build and exclude implementation of economic blockades retaliatory tariffs and trade protectionism.
Shilard nodded earnestly.
We destroyed their industry and agriculture according to a predetermined plan Leuvaarden continued calmly. We did this in order to deprive them of their own goods so they have to buy ours. But our merchants and products will not cross through closed or hostile borders. What will happen then? I will tell you what will happen dear Baron. We will create the crisis of overproduction because our manufactures are working full speed hoping to export. Large losses will also be felt by the maritime trade the result of cooperation with Novigrad and Kovir. Your influential family dear Baron have significant participation in such societies. And family as you are no doubt aware dear Baron are the basic building blocks of such societies. Did you know?
I know Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen lowered his voice even though he knew that the chamber was reliably secure against eavesdropping. I understand. However I would have assurance that Im following the orders of the Emperor… And not some… corporation.
Emperors pass said Leuvaarden. Corporations remain. And survive. I understand your concern Baron. You can be sure you are fulfilling the order of the Emperor which was issued in the interest and for the good of the Empire. I do not deny however that our Emperor was issued some advice from certain corporations.
The envoy unbuttoned his collar and pulled out a gold medallion on which was displayed a burning star inside a triangle.
An impressive decoration Baron Fitz-Oesterlen showed his understanding. Without a doubt very expensive… and elitist… Is it possible to buy it somewhere?
No replied Berengar Leuvaarden. It is necessary to earn it.
If the gentlemen and the lady will allow Shilard Fitz-Oesterlens voice took on a familiar tone which testified that what he was about to say was considered important. If the gentlemen and lady will allow I will read the contents of the message from His Majesty Emhyr var Emreis by the Great Sun Emperor of Nilfgaard…
No not again Demavend gritted his teeth. Dijkstra quietly moaned. None of this escaped Shilards attention.
The imperial message is long he admitted. I will summarise it and limit myself to the most important points. The Imperial Majesty expresses his satisfaction over the course of the deliberations so far and welcomes the achieved compromises and reconciliations. His Imperial Majesty wishes to make further progress in the negotiations and to conclude them with mutual benefit…
Lets get to the point said Foltest And quickly! Lets conclude the mutual benefits and return home.
Thats the spirit Henselt said who was farther from home than anyone. Let us get this over with or well be here until winter.
We have one more compromise said Meve. An issue that we have touched on only a few times in passing. Perhaps out of fear that it would cause us to quarrel. It is time to overcome that fear. The problem will not disappear by not talking about it.
Right said Foltest. We must resolve the status of Cintra the inheritance to the throne and Calanthes successor. The issue is complicated but I have no doubt we can handle it ourselves right Your Excellency?
Oh Fitz-Oesterlen smiled diplomatically and enigmatic. Im sure the question of succession to the throne of Cintra will go smoothly. The solution is simpler than you probably expected.
I submit for discussion Philippa Eilhart announced in a tone that did not invite discussion the following proposal – the territory of Cintras trusteeship. I entrust this mandate to Foltest of Temeria.
Foltests holdings are growing too fast Sabrina Glevissig said with a scowl. Brugge Sodden Angren…
We need said Philippa a strong state at the mouth of the Yaruga. And in the Marnadal Stairs.
It cannot be denied Sile de Tancarville nodded we need it. But they need Emhyr var Emreis. And I recall that our goal is compromise not conflict.
A few days ago Shilard suggested recalled Francesca Findabair that Cintra will be divided with lines into two demarcation zones a southern zone and a northern zone…
A foolish idea said Margarita Laux-Antille. Such a division does not have any meaning and only becomes the seed for future conflict.
I believe said Sile that Cintra should be turned into a condominium state. Administration of the territory should be engaged by both commissioners from the northern kingdoms and the Empire of Nilfgaard. The citadel of Cintra would acquire the status of a free port… You wish to say something Lady Assire? Im used to representing my thoughts coherently and in full form but for now… Im listening.
All the sorceresses turned their sights to Assire var Anahid the Nilfgaardian witch did not look the least bit embarrassed.
I recommend she said in her pleasant calm voice that we focus on other issues. And leave Cintra alone. I have been told about something which I have not had time to tell you ladies. The case of Cintra dear colleagues is already resolved and settled.
What? Philippas eyes narrowed. Whats that supposed to mean?
Triss Merigold sighed audibly. She already knew. She had already guessed what it meant.
Vattier de Rideaux was sad and depressed. His beautiful and passionate lover golden-haired Cantarella was leaving him suddenly and unexpectedly without giving a reason or explanation. For Vattier this was a low and terrible blow he had been left crestfallen nervous distracted and dazed. He had to pay attention be careful and on guard and not to say something stupid while talking to the Emperor. Times of great change did not favour the nervous and incompetent.
The merchants guild Emhyr car Emreis said frowning we have already paid for their invaluable help. We have granted them sufficient privileges more than what they got from the previous three emperors together. In addition we are indebted to Berengar Leuvaarden for his help in uncovering the conspiracy. He has received a high and lucrative position. But if he is incompetent despite his merits he will be shot from a catapult. Make sure that he knows this.
I will Your Majesty. And what of Dijkstra? And his mysterious informant?
Dijkstra would sooner die than reveal who his informant is. However give Dijkstra a fee for the information which literally fell from the sky… But what? Dijkstra would not take anything from me.
If You Majesty will allow…
Speak…
Dijkstra would be happy to accept other information. Something that he doesnt know but would like to know. We could reward him with just such information.
Excellent Vattier.
Vattier de Rideaux sighed with relief. Because he had discreetly turned his head away he was the first to notice the approaching ladies the Countess Liddertal and the young blonde that was entrusted to her care.
Theyre coming he pointed out with a movement of his eyes. Your Majesty let me remind you… The reasons of state… In the interest of the Empire…
Enough Emhyr var Emreis interrupted reluctantly. I said I will consider. Think about the case and make a decision. And then I will inform you what the decision is.
Very well Your Majesty.
Anything else? The White Flame of Nilfgaard said impatiently tapping his glove on his hip. What are you waiting for Vattier?
The issue of Stefan Skellen…
No mercy. Death to traitors. But after a fair trial.
I understand Your Majesty.
Emhyr deigned not to look at him as he said goodbye with a bow and withdrew. Stella Congreve was waiting. And so was the blonde girl.
Here comes the interest of the Empire he thought. The false princess the false Queen of Cintra. The sovereign to the area around the mouth of the Yaruga River which is so important to the Empire. Here she comes looking down terrified in a white silk dress with green sleeves and a necklace in shallow neckline. At Darn Rowan I complimented her dress and jewellery selection. Stella knows my tastes. But what am I supposed to do with this doll? Put her on a dresser or mantle?
Honoured ladies he bowed first. Outside of the throne room of Nilfgaard the rules of civility and courtesy to women were obliged even by the Emperor. They answered him with curtsies and bows of their heads.
They were standing in front of a polite but still Emperor.
Emhyr had had enough protocol.
Stay here please Stella he said dryly. And you girl come with me for a walk. Take my arm. Cheer up. Its just a walk.
They walked side by side down an alley. Imperial Guardsmen members of the elite Impera brigade stayed away but always at the ready. They were trained to protect the Emperor and knew when not to interfere.
They passed a pond empty and sad. A very old carp brought by Emperor Torres had died two days earlier. We will have to release a young strong carp Emhyr decided. Well make a medal with his portrait and the date. Vaesse deiraedh aep eigean. Something ends something begins. This is a new era new times. Let there also be a new carp.
Lost in thought he almost forgot about the girl he was holding on his arm. He remembered her presence due to her warmth the smell of lilies and the interest of the empire. In that order.
They stopped by the pond in the middle rose an artificial island with a rock garden a fountain and a marble sculpture.
Do you know what this figure represents?
Yes Your Majesty she did not immediately answer. It represents a pelican whose beak tears at its own breast to feed its children with blood. It is an allegory of a noble sacrifice. And also…
Im listening carefully.
Also of great love.
Do you think he held her by the shoulders and turned her to face him that a torn chest hurts less?
I dont know… she stammered. Imperial Majesty… I…
He took her hand. He felt her twitch the tremor ran through her hand arm and shoulder.
My father he said was a great ruler but never paid attention to myths and legends he never had the time for such things. He always confused them. Whenever he would bring me here to the park he said that the sculpture of the pelican was rising from the ashes. At least smile girl when the Emperor tells you stories from his childhood. Thats better thank you. I would be sad to think that you are not enjoying your walk with me. Look into my eyes.
Im happy… to be here… Your Majesty. It is a huge honour for me… Also a large joy. I am very happy…
Really? This is not just courtly flattery? Etiquette from Stella Congreves classes? Admit it girl.
She was silent her eyes downcast.
Your Emperor asked you a question said Emhyr var Emreis. And when the Emperor asked no one dares be silent. Naturally no one dares lie.
Really she said in a melodious voice. Im really happy Imperial Majesty.
I believe you Emhyr said after a moments thought. I think. Although I am surprised.
I also… She whispered. I am also surprised.
What? Speak up please.
I wish we could… walk more often. And talk. But I understand… I understand that this is impossible.
You understand well he bit his lip. Emperors rule the world but two things they dont have control over. Their heart and their time. Both belong to the empire.
I know that she said all too well.
I will not be here long he said after a moment of heavy silence. I have to go to Cintra to grace them with my presence at the peace celebration. You will have to go back to Darn Rowan… Cheer up girl. For the second time lift your head in my presence. What is that I see in your eyes? Tears? This is a serious breach of etiquette I will have show Countess Liddertal my highest displeasure. Lift your head I said…
Please… forgive Lady Stella… Imperial Majesty this is my fault. Only mine. Lady Stella has taught me… and prepared me well.
Ive noticed and I appreciate it. Fear not Stella does not run the risk of falling from grace. She never runs the risk. I was just joking with you. Poorly.
I noticed replied the girl terrified by her own boldness. But Emhyr just laughed. Somewhat forced.
Well I like you he said. Trust me. You are brave. Much like…
He stopped.
Much like my daughter he finished in his head. A feeling of guilt struck him like a dog bite.
The girl held his gaze. Its not just the work of Stella thought Emhyr. This really is her nature. And despite appearances she is a diamond that doesnt scratch. No I will not authorise Vattier to kill this girl. Cintra this business interests the Empire but this issue seems to have only one sensible and honourable solution.
Give me your hand.
It was an order delivered in a stern voice and tone. But even though he could not help feeling that she would have done it willingly. Without coercion.
Her hand was small and cold. But not shaking anymore.
What is your name? Please do not tell me it is Cirilla Fiona.
Cirilla Fiona.
I feel like punishing you girl. Severely.
I know Your Majesty. I deserve it. But I … I must be Cirilla Fiona.
I think that you he said still holding her hand regret not being her.
Im sorry she whispered. I regret that I am not her.
Really?
If I was … truly Cirilla perhaps Your Majesty would have been kinder to me. But I am just a fake. An imitation. A doppelganger who is not worthy of anything. Nothing …
He whirled around and grabbed her arm. Then he released her and stepped back.
Would you like a crown? A position? he spoke quietly but quickly pretending not to see her violently shake her head. Tribute? Compliments? Luxury?
He paused. He did not see the that the girl shook her head denying his unjust accusations perhaps even more unjust by the unspoken ones.
He breathed loudly and deeply.
Do you know little moth that what you see in front of you is the flame?
I know Your Majesty.
They were silent for a long time. The smell of spring suddenly whirled in their heads. Intoxicating.
Being the Empress Emhyr finally said dully is not easy contrary to appearances. I do not know if Ill be able to love you.
She nodded to indicate that she knew this. He saw a tear on her cheek. Just like then in the Castle Stygga he felt like a sliver of glass was stuck in his heart.
He hugged her pressing her hard against his chest stroking her hair which smelled like lilies.
My poor child he said in an unnatural voice. My poor reason of state.
Bells rang throughout Cintra. Dignified deep and solemn. But strangely mournful.
An unusual beauty thought hierarch Hemmelfart looking like everyone else at the hanging portrait that would measure like the rest half a fathom by a fathom if not more. An unusual beauty. A half-breed I bet she has in her veins the cursed blood of elves.
Pretty appreciated Foltest prettier than those thumbnails shown to me by my secret service. But portraits are usually flattering.
Quite unlike Calanthe thought Meve. Quite unlike Roegner. Quite unlike Pavetta … Hmmm … There were rumours … No its not possible. She must be the royal blood a legitimate ruler of Cintra. She must. It is required by reasons of state. And history.
She was not like Ive seen in my dreams thought Esterad Thyssen King of Kovir. Im sure she is not the same. But I will not tell anyone. Ill keep this to myself and my Zuleyka together we can decide how we can use this knowledge the dreams have given us.
That was close she was to be my wife this Ciri thought Kistrin of Verden. I would have been the prince of Cintra and heir to the throne according to custom … I probably would have died with Calanthe. Oh well it is good that she ran away from me.
Not for a moment do I believe the fables of love at first sight thougth Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen. Not for a moment. And yet now Emhyr has married the little barbarian. He rejected the possibility of reconciling with imperial nobility and marring their daughters and married Cirilla of Cintra. Why? To dominate a small country that half if not more Nilfgaard would have gained during negotiations? In order to consolidate his power at the mouth of the Yaruga which is essentially in the hands of the Nilfgaard-Novigrad-Kovir maritime trading companies? I do not understand this political necessity so I suspect they did not tell me everything.
Sorceresses Sigismund Dijkstra thought. This is the work of sorceresses. But why would it not be? Undoubtedly it was written that Ciri would be Emhyrs wife Queen of Cintra and Empress of Nilfgaard. No doubt it was her destiny.
Keep it this way Triss Merigold thought happily. It is a good solution. Ciri will be safe. And eventually theyll forget her. They let her live.
The portrait was finally put in place the servants who were hanging it withdrew taking the ladder with them.
At the end of a long line of dark and dusty Cintran nobles beyond the portrait of Cerbin Coram and Corbett past Dagorad and Roegner beyond proud Calanthe and melancholy Pavetta hung the last portrait. It showed the reigning Empress the heiress of the royal blood and the crown. A slim girl with blond hair and sad eyes in a white dress with green sleeves – Cirilla Fiona Elen Riannon Queen of Cintra and Empress of Nilfgaard.
Destiny thought Philippa Eilhart watching Dijkstras eyes.
Poor child thought Dijkstra looking at the portrait. She probably thinks this is the end of her afflictions and misfortunes. Poor child.
In Cintra the bells tolled frightening the gulls.
Soon after the conclusion of the negotiations and the signing of the peace the pilgrim continued his story a celebration was held in Novigrad which culminated in a large military parade. As befitting the first day of a new historical epoch the weather was beautiful.
We are to understand the elf ask sarcastically that you were at it? That you attended the parade?
I was a little late the pilgrim was obviously not someone who was bothered by a little sarcasm. Like I said it was a beautiful day. It promised to be such from dawn.
Vascoigne commander of the fort of Drakenborg and until recently deputy commander for political affairs eagerly slapped his whip on his boots.
Move move he urged his executioners. Theyre expecting more. In Novigrad you can celebrate but here we have to work.
The executioners place the nooses around the prisoners necks and withdrew. Vascoigne swung his whip again.
If anyone wants to say something he said dryly this is your last chance.
Long live freedom said Cairbre aep Diared.
The court was biased against me said Orestes Kopps a marauder pillager and murderer.
Kiss my ass said Robert Pilch a deserter.
Tell Lord Dijkstra that Im sorry said Lennep a former agent convicted of bribery and fraud.
I did not I did not want too … cried Istvan Igalffy swaying on a stump former commandant of the fort removed from the post and brought before a tribunal for excessive acts which are not permitted against the prisoners.
The sun like molten gold exploded over the stockade of the fort. The posts of the gallows threw elongated shadows. In Drakenborg began a new day beautiful and sunny.
The first day of a new era.
Vascoignes whip lashed his boot. He raised and lowered his hand.
The stumps were kicked out from under the feet of the condemned.
Throughout Novigrad bells rang. The sound was carried over the mansard roofs of merchant houses until it came to the narrowest and most remote streets. Whistling rockets and exploding firecrackers. The crowd cheered yelled throwing hats in the air waving handkerchiefs scarves and flags.
Long like the Free Company!
Long live!
Glory to the Condottieri!
Lorenzo Molla saluted the crowd and blew a kiss to the beautiful girls.
If we are paid with the same enthusiasm with which we are cheered he shouted to be heard above the uproar then well be rich!
Its too bad Julia Abatemarcos throat constricted that Frontino couldnt see this …
The marched down the main street Julia Abatemarco Adam Adieu Pangratt and Lorenzo Molla leading a festively dressed Company who were formed in rows of four so none of the horses sleek and shiny moved forward an inch in front of the others. The horses of the condottieri were like their riders - calm and haughty not frightened by the cheers and the shouting of the crowd and the only reaction to the coins and flowers flying towards them was to shake their heads slightly almost imperceptibly.
Long like the Condottieri!
Long live Adam adieu Pangratt! Long live Pretty Kitty!
Julia surreptitiously wiped away a tear and caught a carnation that had been thrown from the crowd.
I never would have dreamed … she said. We won … Poor Frontino …
Youre moved Julia Lorenzo Molla smiled. I never knew you were such a romantic soul.
Well yes. Attention company! Face … left!
They stood at attention in their saddles turning the horses heads to face the grandstand and the seats and thrones arranged there.
I can see Foltest Julia thought. The one with the beard must be Henselt of Kaedwen and the handsome man is Demavend of Aedirn … That Matron must be Queen Hedwig … And the boy by her side Crown Prince Radovid son of the king that was killed … Poor kid …
Long live the condottieri! long like Julia Abatemarco! Long live Adam Pangratt! Long live Lorenzo Molla!
Long live Constable Natalis!
Long live our monarchs! Long live Foltest Demavend and Henselt!
Long live Lord Dijkstra!
Long live His Holiness! A few voices came from the crowd obviously bribes. Novigrads hierarch Cyrus Englekind Hemmelfart rose and blessed the people and the army with his outstretched hands while irreverently covering Queen Hedwig and young Radovid with the skirts of his robe.
Nobody shouts Long live Radovid thought the prince covered by the hierarchs fat ass. No one even looks at me. No one is screaming in honour of my mother. No one remembers my poor father. Even today at a day of triumph which he so richly deserved. After all thats why he was murdered.
He felt a gaze on his neck. Delicate like someone he did not know - or knew but only in his dreams. Something that was soft like a brush of a womans warm lips. He turned his head. He discovered the dark unfathomable eyes of Philippa Eilhart fixed on him.
Wait thought the prince looking away. Just wait.
No one could predict or guess then that this boy of thirteen years which at that time was a person without any relevance in a country ruled by the Regency Council and by Dijkstra would become king. A king who after he paid all the insults that had been given to his mother and him would go down in history with the name Radovid the Stern.
The crowd cheered. The ground beneath the hooves of the horses of the condottieri were carpeted with flowers.
Julia?
Yes Adieu?
Marry me. Become my wife.
Pretty Kitty did not answer for a long time she was surprisingly speechless. The crowd cheered. The Novigrad hierarch sweating and gasping for breath like a big catfish blessed from the stands the burghers and soldiers the city and the world.
Youre married Adam Pangratt.
we have long lived separately. Im getting a divorce.
Julia Abatemarco did not answer. She turned her head.
Surprised.
Confused.
And very happy. Without really knowing why.
The crowd cheered and threw flowers. The rockets and fireworks burst in artificial light above the rooftops and between the noise and the smoke the bells of Novigrad sounded like a whimper.
Shes a woman thought Nenneke. She went to war a child. And has come back a woman. Confident. Realising who she is. Quiet. Relax. A woman.
She won the war. By not letting the war destroy her.
Deborah Eurneid continued listing quietly died of typhus in a camp in Mayena. Prune drowned in the Yaruga when a boatload of wounded capsized. Myrrhe was killed by elves Squirrels during an attack on the hospital in Armeria … Katja …
Tell me child Nenneke gently urged.
Katja Eurneid cleared her throat met a wounded Nilfgaardian in the hospital. After the conclusion of the peace when the prisoners where exchanged she went with him to Nilfgaard.
Ive always said sighed the priestess that love knows no boundaries. And what about Iola the Second?
Alive Eurneid hurried to explain. She is in Maribor.
Why did she not come back?
The adept bowed her head.
She will not return to the temple Mother she said quietly. She is at a hospital with Mister Milo Vanderbeck  the surgeon a halfling. She said that she wants to care for the sick. This is what she wants to dedicate her life to. Forgive her Mother.
Forgive? cried the priestess. Im proud of her!
Youre late Philippa Eilhart said through clenched teeth. Youre late to a feast that has the presence of kings. Bloody hell Sigismund your distain for protocol is well known and you do not need to flaunt it on a day like this …
I have my reasons Dijkstra responded with a look from Queen Hedwig and the raising of his eyebrows from the hierarch of Novigrad. He also caught the scowl on the face of priest Willemer and the sneer on the face of King Foltest. Can I have a word with you Phil?
Alone I imagine …
That would be best Dijkstra smiled. But if you prefer I have no objection to more eyes watching. for example the beautiful eyes of the ladies of Montecalvo.
Lower your voice the sorceress mutter without erasing the smile from her lips.
When will you grant me an interview?
Ill think. Ill let you know. Now leave me alone this is a ceremony. A great feast. Ill remind you if you hadnt noticed.
A great feast?
We are on the threshold of a new era Dijkstra.
The spy shrugged.
The crowd was cheering. Fireworks went off. The bells of Novigrad rang signalling the victory and as a sign of great glory.
But the ringing was strangely mournful.
Hold the reins Jarre Lucienne said. Im getting something to eat. Wrap the reins around your hand. I know you only have one.
Jarre felt a blush of shame and humiliation on his face. He was still not used to the constant feeling that people had nothing better to do but to stare at his stump and his sleeve which was sewn shut. That the world noticed him at all hours pitying his injury and hypocritically lamenting his fortune while in the depth of their souls despising him as something that dared to tamper with his ugliness the beautiful reigning order.
Lucienne he had no choice but to admit was quite different in that sense than the rest of the people. She neither pretended not to see or fell into mannerisms that degraded or humiliated him. Jarre several times found himself thinking that this blonde girl treated him naturally and normally. But that idea constant fought back. He Refused to accept it because he could not bring himself to behave normally or naturally.
The wagon carrying the war amputees squeaked and rattled. After a short rainy season had come the sweltering heat. The potholes formed by the passage of continuous military convoys had dried and hardened becoming ridges edges and protrusions of fantastic shapes and they rolled over these pulled by four horses. The wagon swung and swayed like a ship in a storm. The mutilated most lame and legless soldiers cursed and swore hoarsely. Lucienne held onto Jarre hugging him sharing her magical warmth his prodigious softness and exciting mix of smells – horse leather hay oats and girlish sweat.
The wagon jumped at the next pothole. Jarre pulled on the rein wrapped around his wrist. Lucienne alternately eating bread and sausage clung to his side.
Well well … she noticed his brass medallion and craftily took advantage that Jarres one hand was occupied with the reins. What have we here? A love charm? So you were tricked as well? The guy who invented this trinket had to be a pretty darn good trafficker. The demand for these were great during the war especially after too much vodka. What is the name of the girl you wear inside? Let me see …
Lucienne Jarre blushed like a tomato do not open it please … Im sorry but that is my personal thing. I do not want to offend you but …
The wagon jumped and Lucienne snuggled into Jarre silently.
Ci …ril …la he said with effort he did not expected a peasant girl to have far-reaching knowledge.
You will not forget about her she shut the locket and let it go then looked at the boy. This Cirilla that is. If you truly loved her. Amulets and spells are useless. If she loves you she will be faithful and waiting.
For this? Jarre raised his stump.
The girl narrowed her eyes blue as forget-me-nots.
If she really loves you shell be waiting she said firmly. And nothing else matters. I know this.
You have a lot of experience?
Its none of your business Lucienne blushed this time. I had what I had and with whom. But do not think I belong with those who nod their head and lie down on their back and spread their legs. But I know what I know. If a girl loves a man so loves all of him and not little pieces. Therefore she loves him even when a piece is missing.
The wagon jumped.
You are oversimplifying it Jarre said through clenched teeth. Oversimplifying and idealising Lucienne. Youre forgetting the little detail that is when a man is whole he is supposed to be able to support his wife and family. As a cripple I cannot …
Bah do not cry into my apron she said without a fuss. The Black ones took your hand not your head. What are you looking at? Im from the country but I have eyes and ears. Im bright enough to know by the way you talk that you are a scholar. In addition …
She cleared her throat. Jarre also cleared his throat and breathed her scent. The wagon jumped.
Besides finished the girl I heard what you were saying to others. That your are learned. That you were a scribe in a temple. So the hand … Bah …
The wagon had been driving for a while without hitting any potholes but Jarre and Lucienne seemed unaware – they remained firmly pressed together.
Well she said after a long pause Im lucky with scholars. There was one … I used to … He walked behind me … He knew a lot and had gone through an academy. It even showed in his name.
What was his name?
Semester.
Hey girl called Sergeant Derkacz from behind them a creepy looking man who was crippled during the battle of Mayena. Crack the whip over those geldings heads this cart is crawling along like snot down a wall!
Yeah pick up the pace added a second cripple scratching under his pants leg at a stump covered with shiny pink skin. Weve had enough of these wastelands. I miss the taverns. You dont know what Id do for a beer! Can we not go faster?
I can Lucienne turned around on the wagon box. But if I break a hole in the wheel or the axle you wont be drinking beer only rain water. Youll be waiting a week before we can bring any more wagons for you.
Too bad grinned Derkacz because the other night I had a dream that we were married. You could carry me on your back …
You smelly goat cried Lucienne. The plague take you …
She stopped seeing all the faces of the disabled men travelling in the wagon suddenly turn deathly pale.
The gods! cried one of them. And we were so close to home …
We are lost Derkacz said quietly and without any fuss. He was simply stating a fact.
And they said Jarre thought to himself that there were no longer any Squirrels. That we had killed them all. That the issue with the elves had been resolved.
There were six horses. But on closer inspection there were eight riders. Two of the mounts carried two people. All the horses had a stilted arrhythmic gait their heads bowed low. They looked exhausted.
Lucienne sighed deeply.
The elves approached. They looked even worse than their horses. Nothing remained of their pride their disdainful superiority or charismatic differences. Their clothing usually decorative even in the guerrilla squads was dirty and ragged. Their hair their pride and glory was matted sticky with dirt and dried blood. Their big eyes usually devoid of any expression were now abysses of panic and despair.
Nothing remained of their differences. Death fear hunger and adversity had made them ordinary. Very ordinary.
They did not inspire fear.
Jarre for a moment thought that they would linger but they simply cross paths and disappear into the woods without bothering to look at the wagon and its passengers. They only left behind them a smell an unpleasant smell that Jarre remembered from the field hospitals – the smell of misery urine and festering wounds.
They passed by without bothering to look at them.
But not all.
An elf with long dark hair caked with dirt and dried blood stopped her horse near the wagon. She sat in her saddle hunched over her arm was in a bloody bandage which flies climbed on.
Toruviel said one of her comrades Enca digne luned.
Lucienne quickly realised what was happening. She knew what she was seeing in the elf having been raised in a village she had known the livid spectre of hunger. Therefore she reacted instinctive and unequivocal. She offered the elf some bread.
Enca digne Touruviel repeated the elf. He was the only one of all the company wearing an emblem on his torn jacket sleeve of the silver lightning of the Vrihedd brigade.
The cripples in the wagon had remained still not moving a muscle until that instant suddenly shivering as if a spell had released them. In their hands held out to the elves as if by magic appeared food bread cheese slices of bacon and sausages.
And the elves for the first time in a thousand years spread their hands towards humans.
Lucienne and Jarre were the first people who saw the elves cry. Great choking sobs not even trying to wipe the tears from their dirty faces. Refuting the claims that elves did not have tear ducts.
Enca … Digne repeated the elf with the lightning bolt on his sleeve. He then reached out and took the bread from Derkacz.
Thank you he croaked finding it difficult to adjust his lips to the strange language. Thank you man.
After a while seeing that everyone was finished Lucienne clicked at the horses and jerked the reins. The wagon began to creak and rattle. They were silent.
It was approaching evening when they met armed horsemen. They were led by a woman with white short-cropped hair her face disfigured by scars. One bisected her face from the corner of her mouth in an arc to her eye. The woman was missing half of her right ear and her left arm below the elbow ended in a leather cuff with a brass hook which the reins were wrapped around.
The woman with a hostile look that betrayed her fierce desire for revenge asked about the elves. About the Scoiatael. The terrorists. The fugitives survivors from a commando unit destroyed two days ago.
Jarre Lucienne and the cripples in the wagon avoided eye contact with the white-haired one-handed rider and indistinctly mumbled that they had not seen any elves or met anybody on the road.
You lie thought the woman who was once Black Rayla. I know you are lying. You lie out of pity. But even so that will not help them because I White Rayla do not know pity.
Hooray dwarves! Long live Els Barclay!
In Novigrad the pavement rumbled beneath the shod boots of the veterans of the Volunteer Army. The dwarves marched in a formation of five waving their flags which depicted crossed hammers.
Long live Mahakam! Long live the dwarves!
Glory and honour to them!
Suddenly someone in the crowd laughed. And soon everybody was laughing.
This is a scandal … gasped Hemmelfart. An affront … It is unforgivable …
Vile people hissed the priest Willemer.
Pretend you do not see them Foltest told them calmly.
We should not have skimped when dividing the spoils said Meve sourly. And refused to supplement the rations.
The dwarven officers retained their seriousness and form and stood before the grandstand and saluted. The non-commissioned officers and soldiers of the Volunteer Army however expressed their discontent against the austerity measures imposed by the kings and hierarch. Some of them once past the grandstand showed the kings a bent elbow other made one of their favourite gestures – a clenched fist with an upright middle finger. Scholars describe the gesture as digitus infamis. Common people called it something worse.
The blush on the faces of the kings and the hierarch showed that they were familiar with both names.
We should not have insulted their greed Meve insisted. There people are very fastidious.
The howling around Elskerdeg became a gruesome chant. None of the men sitting by the fire paid any attention.
The first to speak after the long silence was Boreas Mun.
The world has changed. Justice has been done.
You overdid it a bit with the justice my friend the pilgrim smiled. However I agree that the world has changed. Adjusting to the fundamental laws of physics.
I wonder said the elf if we are thinking of the same laws.
Every action said the pilgrim has a reaction.
The elf chuckled but it sounded friendly.
A point to you human.
Stefan Skellen son of Bertram Skellen former Imperial Coroner stand up. The Supreme Court of the eternal Empire by the grace of the Great Sun finds you guilty of crimes and abuse of which you were charged. For the treason and active participation in a conspiracy against the Empire as well as the person of the Imperial Majesty. Your guilt has been ratified and proven and the Tribunal has found without any extenuation circumstances. Also His Imperial Majesty has exercised his right not to grant a pardon. Stefan Skellen son of Bertram Skellen you will be transported from this courtroom to the Citadel where you will be held until the proper time comes. As a traitor to your homeland of Nilfgaard you are unworthy to tread upon its ground; you will be laid on a wooden skid and dragged by horses to Millennium Square. As a traitor to his homeland of Nilfgaard you are unworthy to breathe the air; you will be hanged by the neck on the gallows between heaven and earth. So you will stay there until you die. Then your body will be cremated and the ashes scattered to the winds on the four sides of the world. Stefan Skellen son of Bertram Skellen traitor. I the Chairman of the Supreme Court of the Empire sentence you and this is the last time I will speak your name. From now on let it be forgotten.
We did it we made it! Professor Oppenhauser shouted as he burst into the deans office. We did it gentlemen! Finally! Finally! It works! It moves! It works!
Really? Jean La Voisier professor of chemistry called Carbonstinker by his students asked sceptically. Is it really possible? And how out of curiosity does it work?
Perpetual motion!
Perpetuum mobile? exclaimed Edmund Bumbler the elderly zoology lecturer. Youre not exaggerating my dear colleague?
Not at all! Oppenhauser exclaimed jumping like a goat. Not at all! It works! Ive launched a functional mobile and it works! Without stopping! Perpetually! For ever and ever! There are no words to describe it colleagues you have to see it! Come with me hurry!
Im eating breakfast Carbonstinker protested but his protest was lost in the commotion excitement and widespread bustle.
The teachers graduates and students stood up to collect their togas capes and gowns and ran to the door led by the shouting and gesticulation Oppenhauser. Carbonstinker dismissed them with a digitus infamis and returned to the roll on his plate.
The group of scholars were on the march ready to see the fruit of Oppenhausers thirty years of efforts they ran quickly towards the office and were about to open the door when suddenly the ground trembled. Noticeably. And strongly. Very strongly.
It was a seismic shock one of a series of shocks caused by the destruction of the castle Stygga the hiding place of the sorcerer Vilgefortz. The seismic wave from far off Ebbing had reached here to Oxenfurt.
With a clatter several panes of stained glass fell from the front of the Department of Fine Arts. The dusty bust of Nicodemus de Boot the first rector of the academic institution fell from its pedestal. Carbonstinkers cup of tea fell from the table where he was eating his roll. From a banana tree a freshmen from the physics department Albert Solpietra fell while trying to impress the female medical students.
The perpetual motion machine of Professor Oppenhauser the legendary inventor moved for the last time before standing still. Forever. And it was never possible to restart it.
Long live the dwarves! Long live Mahakam!
What a band what soldiers thought the hierarch Hemmelfart as he bless the parade with his trembling hands. Who are they cheering here? The venal condottieri the obscene dwarves what kind of madness is this? In the end who won this war them or us? By the gods I have to warn the monarchs. When historians and scribes are put to work we must subject their works through censorship. Mercenaries witchers murderers for hire non-humans and all kinds of suspicious items should disappear from the annals of mankind. We have to erase them. Not a word about them. Not a word.
And not a word about him too he thought clenching his lips and looking at Dijkstra watching the parade with a clearly bored expression.
It will be necessary thought the hierarch to issue a command to the kings about Dijkstra. His presence is an insult to decent people. This atheist and villain. Let him disappear without a trace. And let him be forgotten.
This is what you think you sanctimonious purple pig thougth Philippa Eilhart effortlessly reading the hierarchs mind. Do you want to rule do you want to dictate and influence? Would you like to decide? Never! The only thing you can decide about is your haemorrhoids and even that is on your own ass and you decisions there will not be relevant either.
And Dijkstra remains. As long as I need him.
Once you make a mistake thought the priest Willemer fixing his eyes on the shiny red lips of Philippa Eilhart. Or any of you make a mistake. And youll lose your conceit arrogance and pride. The plots that you weave. Your immorality. Your atrocity and perversions to which you surrender in which you live. All light will eventually leave and the pestilence of your sins will spread when you make a mistake. The moment will come.
Because even if you do not make a mistake I will find a way to defame you. Some misfortune will befall mankind – a curse a plague a pestilence of perhaps an epidemic … Then all the blame will be on you. You will be punished for not having been able to prevent the plague by not knowing how to avoid its consequences. You will carry with you all the blame.
And then I will light the fire.
The old tomcat called Ginger because of the colour of his coat died. Ugly. Convulsing in agony clawing vomiting blood and pus and suffering from bloody diarrhoea. He meowed even though he knew it was beneath his dignity. His meow was pitifully weak. He was losing strength quickly.
Ginger knew why he was dying. Or at least figured out what had killed him.
A few days ago a strange freighter entered the harbour at Cintra an old grimy hulk which carried on the bow a barely legible inscription Catriona. Ginger – obviously - could not read the name. A rat walking down a mooring rope came down to the dock. Just one. It was a mangy and dirty looking rat. And it was missing an ear.
Ginger bit the rat. He was hungry but his instinct stopped his from devouring this abomination. However several large black shiny fleas jumped from the rat and settled in his fur.
What happened to this cat?
Probably been poisoned.
Ugh it stinks! Remove it from here woman!
Ginger stiffened and noiselessly opened his bloody mouth. He no longer felt the broom which the lady of the house thanked him with for his eleven years of catching mice. He was expelled from the house dying in a gutter full of suds and urine. Dying and also wishing those ungrateful people would also fall ill. To suffer as much as he was.
His last wish was soon fulfilled. On a large scale. A scale so large a cats mind could not even imagine.
The woman who expelled Ginger out into the gutter paused and pulled her skirt up so she could scratch above her knee. It itched.
A flea had bitten her.
The stars twinkled brightly over Elskerdeg. The sparks from the fire vanished into this background.
Neither the peace of Cintra said the elf nor the more pompous parade at Novigrad can be considered a turning point or milestone. What are their meaning? Governments do not create history with revenues and decrees and no one will accept their authority as truth. One of the brighter manifestation of human arrogance is your so-called historiography trying to deliver opinions and verdicts on past events as you call them. This is typical of you humans who nature has given an existence as fleeting as that of an insect or an ant with your ridiculous life-spans under a hundred years. Your fleeting existence is trying to adapt to the complexity of the world. You refuse to take note that history is a process that constantly continues and never ends; it cannot be divided into sections from here to here from date to date. It is not impossible to define history  let alone change it by a proclamation by a monarch. Even if you win the war.
Do not undertake a philosophical discourse the pilgrim said. As I said I am a simple man. I will however draw attention to two things. Firstly a short life protects us against decadence forcing people to live intensely and fully to take advantage of every moment of life and enjoy it. I speak as a human being but that same thought probably occurred to the long lived elves who were going off to fight in the Scoiatael commandos. Correct me if Im wrong.
The pilgrim waited a reasonable amount of time but no one corrected him.
Secondly he continued it seems to me that the governments thought not being able to change history can with their interference create the illusion which is quite convincing. They have the tools and the methods.
Oh yes said the elf turning his face away. The powerful have tools and methods. And there is no arguing with them.
The galley bumped against the rail of the pier that was covered in piles of seaweed and shells. The moorings were thrown. There were shouts oaths and commands.
Gulls collected garbage that floated on the surface of the water. On the shore a crowd was waiting –mostly soldiers.
End of the lines elves said the Nilfgaardian commander. We are in Dillingen. The soldiers are waiting for you.
He was right they were waiting for them.
None of the elves – and certainly not Faoiltiarna – did not believe the assurances that they would receive fair trails and amnesty. The Scoiatael officers from the Vrihedd brigade did not have any false hopes about the fate that awaited them after the Yaruga. Most were reconciled stoically accepting it and resigned themselves. They were convinced that nothing else could surprise them.
They were wrong.
They were shoved from the galley. Their chains rattled noisily. They were driven down the pier and led to a boardwalk between two rows of armed soldiers. There were civilians there too whose quick eyes jumped from one prisoners face to another.
They will carry out the selection thought Faoiltiarna. He was not mistaken. The chances of his scarred face being overlooked were not possible.
Isengrim Faoiltiarna. The Iron Wolf. What a nice surprise!
The soldiers dragged him out of the crowd of prisoners.
Va Faill Coinneach Da Reo called after him who was also identified and dragged off by other men who wore the bade of the red eagle of Redania. Seved caerme se dea!
Youll see him growled the civilian who had picked out Faoiltiarna but only in hell! They are already waiting for him in Drakenborg. Wait! Isnt that Riordain? Take him!
The next to be selected was Angus Bri Cri.
They had only selected three of them. Only three.
Faoiltiarna realised what was happening and suddenly to his surprise he began to feel afraid.
Va Faill! Angus Bri Cri shouted as he was dragged away with his other brethren. Va Faill fraeren!
A soldier pushed him brutally.
They did not take them far. They came to a hut close to the marina. Just off the dock which swayed with a forest of masts.
The civilian nodded. Faoiltiarna was pushed up against a pole under a beam over which they had thrown a rope. They began to attach an iron hook to the rope. Riordain and Angus sat beside him on a bench.
Mister Riordain Mister Bri Cri said the civilian coldly. You have been covered by the amnesty. The court has decided to be gracious. Justice must be satisfied however he added without waiting for a response. for the families for those you have killed. The verdict has been handed down.
Both elves did not have time to scream. From behind them a noose was thrown around their necks and pulled. They fell off of the bench and were dragged across the floor. With their hands cuffed they were unable to loosen the ropes. Executioners knelt on their chests. Knives flashed drawing blood. The noose was not able to mute the sounds that made hair stand on end.
It took a long time. It always did.
Your verdict Mister Faoiltiarna said a third civilian to the elf has come with an additional specialty. Something extra …
Faoiltiarna was not going to wait for any specialty. The locked handcuffs which he had worked on for the last two nights now opened as if by magic.
A terrible blow from the heavy chain toppled both of the soldiers guarding him. Faoiltiarna next jumped up and hit a civilian in the face with his chains then jumped through a small window covered in cobwebs sweeping away the glass and frame and leaving remains of his blood and shreds of his clothes.
He clattered onto the planks of the pier. He tumbled rolled and dived into the water among the fishing boats and barges. The thick chains which were still attached to his right wrist dragged him to the bottom. Faoiltiarna fought with all his strength to fight for his life that until recently he thought he hadnt cared about.
Catch him! the soldiers tore out of the shed. Catch him! Kill him!
There! shouted others coming from further down the pier. To the boats!
Shoot him! shouted the civilian hoarsely trying to stem the blood with both hands that flowed from his eye. Kill him!
He heard the click of crossbows. Gulls flew past squealing.
The dirty water between the barges began to spay with the impact of arrows.
Hurray! The parade was lengthening and the multitudes of Novigrad were showing symptoms of fatigue and hoarseness. Hurray!
Glory to the kings!
Philippa Eilhart looked around making sure that no one unauthorised was listening and leaned in towards Dijkstra.
What did you want to talk to me about?
The spy also looked around.
The assassination of King Vizimir in July last year.
Im listening
The half-elf who murdered the king Dijkstra lowered his voice even more was definitely crazy. But he was not alone.
What are you saying?
Quiet hissed Dijkstra. Hush Phil.
Do not call me Phil. Do you have evidence? What? From where?
Youd be surprised Phil if I told you where. When can I expect an audience with Your Ladyship?
Philippa Eilharts eyes were like two black bottomless lakes.
Soon Dijkstra.
Bells rang. The crowd cheered hoarsely. The troops marched. The petals of flowers fell like snowflakes on the pavement of Novigrad.
Are you still writing?
Ori Reuven flinched and made a splash. He had served Dijkstra for nineteen years but he was still not used to the stealthy movements of his boss his sudden appearance and where or how he did it.
Good evening ahem ahem my lord …
Shadow People Dijkstra read the front of the manuscript that he had taken from the table. Or the story of His Majestys Secret Service written by Oribasius Giafranco Paolo Reuven law grad … Oh Ori. At your age such nonsense …
Ahem ahem …
I came to say goodbye Ori.
Reuven looked at him in amazement.
You see my faithful friend said the spy without waiting for the clerk to cough I am old and besides that I am stupid. I said a word to one person. Only one. And only one word. It was one word too many and one person too many. Pay attention Ori. Do you hear?
Ori Reuven rolled his astonished eyes and shook his head. Dijkstra was silent for a moment.
You do not hear he said after a moment. And I hear them. In the corridors. Rats running around the city of Tretogor. Here we have them. Approaching on their soft little paws.
They emerged from the darkness of the shadows. Black masked and fast as rats. The guards and sentries in the antechamber succumbed without a cry to the lightning strikes of their stilettos with narrow angular edges.
Blood ran over the floor of the Palace of Tretogor on its swept and stain wooden floors seeping into the rare carpets from Vengerberg.
They came down all corridors leaving a trail of corpses.
There said one pointing to a door. His voice was muffled by a scarf that covered his face up to his eyes. Through there. Through the office where old Reuven works.
There is no escape said the one who was in charge his eyes shone through the velvet masks openings. Behind the desk is a blind room it does not even have a window.
All the corridors are covered. All the doors and all the windows. He cannot escape. He is in our trap.
Forward!
The door swung open and weapons gleamed.
Death! Death to the murderous torturer!
Ahem ahem? Ori Reuven rolled his myopic and fearful eyes. What do you want? How can I ahem ahem help you gentlemen?
The murderers went to the door to Dijkstras private chamber rushing around the room like rats penetrating every nook and cranny. They flew over the floor picking at tapestries painting and panels. With their stilettos they tore the curtains and upholstery.
Hes gone! shouted one running from the office. Hes gone!
Where is he? asked the leader leaning over Ori and drilling him with a look from behind the holes of his black mask. Where is that bloody dog?
Not here said Ori Reuven without fear. You can see that for yourself.
Where is he? Speak up! Where is he?
I dont know ahem ahem Ori coughed. Am I my brothers keeper?
You will die old man!
I am an old man. Im sick. And very tired. Ahem ahem. I do not have any fear of your knifes.
The murderers left the room at a run. And disappeared as quickly as they appeared.
They did not kill Ori Reuven. They were following orders. And among those orders where nothing concerning Ori Reuven.
Oribasius Giafranco Paolo Reuven spent six years in various prisons interrogated repeatedly by successive judges who questioned him on various topics which often did not seem to make any sense.
After six years he was released. At that time he was very ill. Scurvy had left him without teeth anaemia hairless glaucoma sightless and asthma without breath.
During the interrogation they broke the fingers on both hands.
He lived for less than a year in the wild. He died in a temple hospice. In misery. Forgotten.
The manuscript of his book Shadow People or the story of His Majestys Secret Service disappeared without a trace.
The sky was getting light to the east the tops of the trees had a pale aura that heralded dawn.
There had been silence around the bonfire for a long time. the pilgrim the elf and the tracker watched the dying fire and said nothing.
Elskerdeg was again silent. The howling spectre had moved on tired of howling at them having finally understood that the three individuals sitting around the fire had seen too many horrors to worry about a single spectre.
If we are to travel together Boreas Mun said suddenly his eyes still lingering on the embers of the fire glowing ruby-red we ought to overcome our misgivings. Leave behind everything that happened. the world has changed. We have a new life ahead of us. Something ends something begins … We hoped …
He paused and coughed. He was not used to talking about these things and was afraid of ridicule. But his companions were not taking it as a joke or laughing. On the contrary Boreas felt warmth emanating from them.
We hoped that beyond Elskerdeg Pass he continued that the we will be safer in Zerrikania or Haakland. We expect a long and dangerous journey. If we are going to explore it together … we must overcome our misgivings. My name is Boreas Mun.
The pilgrim with the brimmed hat stood straightening his powerful frame and shook the outstretched hand towards him. The elf also rose. A strange grimace appeared on his macabre disfigured face.
After shaking hands with the tracker the pilgrim and the elf also shook hands.
The world has changed said the pilgrim. Something ends. Im Sigi Reuven.
Something begins the elf with the scarred face grimaced in what according to all indications was a smile. My name is … Wolf Isengrim.
They shook hands quickly. forcefully even with abruptness.
For a moment it seemed like a preamble to a battle more than a gesture of harmony. But only for a moment. The wood in the fire threw up sparks celebrating the event with lively fireworks.
The evil take me grinned Boreas Mun if its not the beginning of a beautiful friendship.
…As well as many of the other faithful St. Philippa was also besmirched with betraying the Kingdom inducing riots and plotting a coup. Willemer a heretic and sectarian unlawfully appointed himself the title of archpriest and ordered St. Philippa to be thrown into a dark dungeon and to plague her with cold and hunger until she confessed to her sins of which she was accused and repented. Also various instruments of torture were used to try and break her spirit. But St. Philippa with disdain spit in his face and accused him of sodomy.
The heretic had her disrobed and whipped her with barbed wire and placed sharp splinters under her nails. While unceasingly preaching about his faith and denouncing the Goddess. But St. Philippa laughed at him and recommended to him to heal his sick mind.
Willemer then gave the order to have her taken to the rack and stretched while tearing her body with sharp hooks and burning her with candles. Although thus tormented St. Philippa showed no weakness in body and indeed her resistance and endurance seemed almost superhuman. The executioners arms went limp and with fear they retreated from her. Then the filthy heretic Willemer began to threaten them and told them to continue the torment. They burned St. Philippa with red-hot irons pulled her limbs out of their joints and pulled at her breasts with blacksmith tongs. And although she passed away from this torment she confessed nothing.
The shameless heretic Willemer we read in the books of our holy fathers later suffered for this punishment and it was that lice and worms began to eat him alive his entrails rotted away and he died miserably. His carcass carried with it a foul stench and nobody wanted to bury him and so he was dropped in a swamp.
For the suffering and death of St. Philippa the eternal memory of a martyrs crown rightfully belongs. Let us give the Great Mother Goddess praise for her lessons and teachings. Amen.
The Life of St. Philippa Martyr of Mons Calvus
The Book of Martyrs Compiled in the Breviary of Tretogor For the Contemplation of the Holy Fathers and Mothers.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
They galloped at breakneck speeds like madmen. They rode through vibrant spring days.
The horses were flying and people who were toiling straightened their bent necks and backs and could not believe their eyes – did they just see riders or ghosts?
They galloped at night in the dark damp nights and through the warm rain. People awoke in bed and looked around terrified fighting against the pain that grew in them in their throats and chests. They jumped out of bed at the sound of the pounding of the shutters the crying of the children and the howls of the dogs. They peered through the windows not believing their eyes – were these riders or ghosts?
In Ebbing stories began to circulate about the three demons.
The trio of riders appeared suddenly out of nowhere as if by magic catching by surprise The Lame who had no opportunity to escape. Neither did he have time to turn for help. More than five hundred paces separated the cripple from the first row of houses of the village. Even if it were closer the cripple would receive no help from the residents of Jealousy. It was siesta time which in this sleepy hamlet usually lasted from late morning to early evening.
Aristotle Bobeck nicknamed the Lame a local beggar and philosopher knew that during siesta time the villagers would not respond anything.
The riders were three. Two women and a man. The man had white hair and a sword lying across his back. One of the women was dressed in black and white and had inky black curly hair. The youngest had ashen hair and a disfiguring scar on her cheek. She rode a beautiful black mare. The Lame had a sense of seeing the horse before.
The youngest girl spoke first.
Are you from here?
I did nothing said the Lame his teeth chattering. I collect morels here. Have pity do not hurt a cripple.
Are you from here? She repeated her green eyes flashing with warning.
The Lame started to cringe.
Yes my lady he said. I come from here from Brika. I mean Jealousy. I was born here and here I will surely die…
Were you here last summer and fall?
Where else would I be?
Do not answer me with questions!
I was here my lady.
The black mare shook its head and pricked up its ears. The cripple felt the glares from the white-haired and the black-haired woman sting like thorns. He feared the white -haired man the most.
Last year the girl with the scar told the cripple in September more specifically September ninth during the first quarter of the moon six young people were murdered here. Four boys… And two girls. Do you remember this?
The Lame swallowed. He suspected for some time now he was sure.
The girl had changed. It was not just the scar on her face. She was not the same now as she was back then when she was tied to the pole and Bonhart forced her to watch as he cut the heads off of the Rats. Not the same as when she was forced to undress in the Chimeras Head Inn and the Bounty Hunter beat her. Those eyes… Those eyes had changed.
Speak! Snapped the woman with the black hair. Tell us what we ask!
I remember my lady said the Lame. I remember the six kids being killed. Last year it was. In September.
The girl was silent for a while. Not looking at him but at some point in the distance above his shoulder.
So you most likely know… she said at last with effort where the young ones where buried. At the bottom of which stockade… under which dumpster or what dunghill… Or if the bodies were burned… If they were taken to the forest and left for the foxes and wolves… Take me there. Do you understand?
I understand my lady. Follow me it is a short walk.
He limped forward and felt the hot breath of the horses on the nape of his neck. He never looked up. Something told him that he should not.
Here we are he pointed after a while. This is our village cemetery. And here are the ones that you asked about Lady Falka.
She took a deep breath. The Lame looked at her to see the expression on her face. Black-hair and white-hair were silent their faces like stone. She stared at the long low mound of the common grave neat tidy and topped with sandstone slabs. The spruce that had adorned the mound was discoloured and the flowers that someone had placed here long ago were now dry and yellowish.
The girl jumped down from her horse.
Who? The girl asked quietly still staring at the mound.
Well the Lame cleared his throat a lot of the locals from Jealousy contributed. But mostly it was the widow Goulue and young Nycklar. The widow has always been a good and kind woman. And Nycklar… he was haunted by terrible dreams. Until he gave the dead a proper burial.
Where can I find the widow and Nycklar?
The Lame was silent for a long moment.
The widow is here buried behind that twisted birch he said finally looking fearlessly into the green eyes of the girl. She was taken by pneumonia this winter. And Nycklar was drafted into the army. We heard that he supposedly died in the war.
I had forgotten she whispered. Forgotten that their fate had been linked to mine.
She approached the mound and knelt or rather fell to the ground. She bent low almost touching her face to the sandstone slabs. The Lame noticed that the white-haired man made a motion as if to dismount but the dark-haired lady caught him by the arm and held him with a gesture and a gaze.
The horses snorted tossing their heads and rattling their bridles.
For a long time the girl knelt over the graves he lips moving in a silent litany. She rose faltered. The Lame inadvertently caught her elbow. She started strongly and yanked her arm away. She looked at him angrily through her tears. But did not say a word. She even nodded with thanks when he held her stirrup.
Well my lady Falka he dared. The strange wheel of destiny is turning. You were at that time in a dreadful position. Few of us here in Jealousy thought that youd escape with your life. And here you are today alive and well while Goulue and Nycklar are in the other world. Who can you express your gratitude to for the grave…
My name is not Falka she said sharply. My name is Ciri. And in regards to my gratitude…
You can feel honoured because of her the dark-haired one spoke chillingly making the Lame shiver. For her grace for humanity has come to you all to your entire village and that is your reward. And you do not know how big that is.
On the ninth of April shortly after midnight the first inhabitants of Claremont awakened to a bright red glow flickering through the widows of their homes. The rest of the inhabitants of the town rushed out of bed to screaming a commotion and the ringing of an alarm bell.
Only one of the buildings was on fire. A large wooden building of the former temple once dedicated to a deity whose name was not even remembered by the oldest of old women. The temple that was now converted into a amphitheatre which occasionally held circus spectacles fighting and other diversions used to pull the Claremont villagers out of boredom melancholy and lethargy.
The amphitheatre was now in flames and shaking with explosions. From all the windows shot tongues of flames.
Put it out! Roared the owner of the amphitheatre a merchant named Houvenaghel running about and waving his hands his powerful paunch shaking. He was in a nightcap and a heavy fur-lined coat which he had thrown on over his dressing gown. He ran barefoot through the mud in the streets.
Put it out! Men! Get water!
This is the punishment of the gods said one old lady. For the grievances that took place in their former abode.
Aye aunt. It certainly is.
From the burning building radiated heat which evaporated puddles of stinking horse urine with hissing sparks. Suddenly a wind sprang up.
Put it out! Houvenaghel screamed wildly seeing the fire spread to the brewery and granary. Men! Get buckets for the water!
There was no shortage of volunteers. Claremont even had its own fire department equipped and maintained by Houvenaghel. They did everything in their power to put out the fire. But it was useless.
We cannot handle it the fire brigade commander groaned rubbing his soot smeared face. This is no ordinary fire… It is a fire from hell.
Black magic… coughed another fireman.
From the burning building they head an ominous creaking and the sound of rafters and beams cracking. There was a thunderous rumble and sparks and flames shot high into the sky.
The roof broke and fell into the arena. The whole building bent as if bowing to an audience.
Then the walls collapsed.
With effort the fire-fighters and volunteers managed to save part of the granary and about a quarter of the brewery.
Dawn came smelly and pungent.
Houvenaghel sat in the mud and ashes his nightcap and gown sooty and dirty. He cried bitterly pouting like a child. Naturally he had insured the theatre the brewery and the granary. The problem was that the insurance company was owned by Houvenaghel. Nothing not even tax fraud could compensate for his losses.
Now where? Geralt asked looking at the column of smoke that clouded the rosy morning sky. Where else do you want to visit Ciri?
She looked at him and he soon regretted asking. Suddenly he wanted to hug her he dreamed of holding her in his arms cuddling her and caressing her hair. To protect her. And never allow her to be alone. To not suffer any more evil. And that nothing would happen to her that would make him crave revenge.
Yennefer was silent. Yennefer was often silent lately.
Now Ciri said quietly we go to a village called Unicorn. The name comes from the straw unicorn that protects the town. A poor and ridiculous puppet. I would like that as a reminder of what happened there let the inhabitants have… if not valuable at least a more dignified idol. I would like to ask for your help Yennefer because without magic…
Sure Ciri. What next?
The Pereplut Swamps. I am confident that I will be able to… find a cabin in the middle of the swamp. I will find the remains of a man. I want those remains to rest in a decent tomb.
Geralt said nothing. But didnt look away.
After continued Ciri without the slightest difficulty withstanding his look the village of Dun Dare. The local tavern has probably been burned and it is possible that the innkeeper has been murdered. It is my fault; I was blinded by hatred and revenge. If he had a family Ill try and make it up to the survivors.
You cannot make it up Geralt said still looking at her.
I know she said sharply almost angrily. But I will stand in front of them with humility. I will remember the look in their eyes. I hope that the memory of those eyes will protect me from similar mistakes. Do you understand Geralt?
I understand Ciri Yennefer said. Both of us we understand you very well my dear. Lets go.
The horses ran as if carried by the wind of a magic storm. Alarmed by the trio of riders a pilgrim on the road lifted his head. A merchant with a wagonload of goods a felon fleeing the law a settler who had been thrown out of his land. A bum looked up a deserter and a wander with a staff. They raised their heads astonished and frightened. Not believing their eyes.
In Geso in Ebbing stories began to circulate. About the Wild Hunt. About three ghostly riders. Rumours were invented and spun in the evenings in smoky pubs that smelled of fried onions and butter and in meeting rooms and huts. Rumours were invented told and exaggerated. A great war of heroism and chivalry of honour and friendship as well as meaningless treachery. With sincere and faithful love which always wins out in the end about crime and punishment of criminals that are always struck by justice.
The truth as always rises up like oil on water.
They invented lies and enjoyed these fables. They revelled in pure fantasy. Because out in the real world everything worked out the opposite.
The legend grew. People listened as if in a trance captivated by the emphatic words of the storyteller who told the story of the witcher and the sorceress. The story of the Tower of Swallows. Of Ciri the witcheress with the scarred face. Of Kelpie the magical black mare.
Of the Lady of the Lake. That came many years later.
But for now like a seed soaked by rain the legend sprouted and grew among the people.
They did not realise when May came. They first noticed at night time when they saw the bright distant fires of Belleteyn. When Ciri with strange excitement jumped onto Kelpies back and galloped towards the fires Geralt and Yennefer took advantage of the intimate moment.
After removing the necessary clothes they made love on a sheepskin on the ground. They made love urgently in silence without words. They made love quickly however.
And then along came the climax and fulfilment trembling and kissing each others tears amazed at that fate had given them time to express their love.
Geralt?
Im listening Yen.
When we… When we were not together were you with other women?
No.
Not once?
Not once.
Your voice did not tremble. So I do not know why I dont believe you.
I am only for you Yen.
Now I do.
Without realising it May had arrived. Dandelions grew in the meadows and the trees were white and fluffy and thick with flowers. The oak too noble to rush remained dark but on the edges green leaves were beginning to show.
One night that they spent under the open sky the witcher awakened from a nightmare. It seemed as if he was paralysed and helpless a great grey owl was clawing at his face and with its sharp hooked beak trying to peck his eyes out. He awoke. But he was not sure if he had moved from one nightmare to another.
Over their encampment poured bright light that startled the horses. In the midst of the brightness a room was visible – a columned hall in a castle. Around a table sat ten figures.
Ten women.
He could hear words. Snippets of sentences.
…Bring her to us Yennefer. We command you.
You cannot give me orders. You cannot give orders to her. You dont have any power over her!
Im not afraid of them mother. They cannot do anything. If they wish I will stand before them.
We will meet on June first. At the new moon. We command you both to appear. We warn you well punish any disobedience.
I will come now Philippa. Let her stay with him. Dont leave him alone. Just a couple of days. I will come immediately. As a show of good faith. I have vowed Philippa. Please.
The light began to throb. The horses snorted crazed and kicked at the ground.
The witcher awoke. This time for real.
The next day Yennefer confirmed his fears. After a long meeting which they excluded Ciri from.
Im leaving she said dryly. I have to. Ciri will stay with you. For a time. Then it will come time for her to leave as well. And then well all meet again.
He nodded. Reluctantly. Hed had enough of nodding silently agreeing with every decision. But he nodded. One way or another he loved her.
It is imperative she said mildly that you not resist. Nor can you postpone it. It is necessary to comply. Im doing this for your own good. And especially for the good of Ciri.
He nodded.
Until we meet again she said almost tenderly Ill make it up to you Geralt. There has been too much silence between us. Now instead of nodding give me a hug and kiss.
He obeyed. One way or another he loved her.
Now where? Ciri asked she had barely spoken since Yennefer had disappeared with a flash through her portal.
The river… Geralt coughed conquering the pain under his breast bone. The river in front of us is called the Sansretour. We are going upstream. To a place that I want to show you. It is a land of fairytales.
Ciri frowned. Her saw her clench her fists.
All fairytales she said end badly. There does not exist a fairytale land.
There does. Youll see.
It was the day after the full moon when they saw Toussaint bathed in green and the sunlight. When they saw the hills slopes and vineyards. The roofs of towers and castles shining in the morning sun.
The view did not disappoint. It was impressive. As it always was.
This is beautiful Ciri said with delight. Wow! Those castles are like toys… Like glazed decorations on a cake… It is tempting to lick!
The architecture is by Faramond Geralt wisely instructed. Wait until youve seen up close the palaces and gardens of Beauclair.
Palace? Were going to the palace? You know the local king?
Duchess.
The Duchess she said wryly watching him intently from beneath her fringe doesnt have green eyes? Short black hair?
No he snapped looking away. She looks completely different. I dont know where you got that idea…
Lets not talk about it Geralt all right? How do you know the local Duchess?
As I said I know her. A little bit. Not very well if youre interested. But I know the local prince consort or candidate for consort. You also know him Ciri.
Ciri kicked Kelpie in the sides making her dance in the road.
Dont make me suffer!
Dandelion.
Dandelion? With the Duchess? How is that possible?
Its a long story. We left him here alongside his beloved. We promised him to visit on our return visit when…
He paused and became serious.
There was nothing you could do Ciri said quietly. Do not torture yourself Geralt. Its not your fault.
Yes it is my fault he thought. Mine. Dandelion will ask. And Ill have to answer. Milva. Cahir. Regis. Angoulême.
The sword of destiny cuts both ways.
By all the gods thats enough. Enough. We must end this once and for all!
Come on Ciri.
In these clothes? She said. To the palace?
I dont see anything wrong with our clothes he interrupted. We are not going to a ball. We can meet Dandelion in the stables. He saw the look on her face and quickly added. I have to go down to the bank. Ill pick up some cash. In the squares and streets youll find a lot of tailors and dressmakers. You can buy what you want and dress up how you please.
Good she playfully cocked her head. Youve got cash?
You can buy yourself whatever you want he repeated. Even ermine. And basilisk shoes. I know a shoemaker who should have some in stock.
How did you make so much money?
By killing. Lets go Ciri lets not waste time.
In the bank of Cianfanelli Geralt requested a transfer credit allocation and took some money. He wrote letters that were given to fast couriers that were riding for the Yaruga. He politely excused himself from the dinner invitation from the attentive and polite banker.
Ciri waited in the street watching the horses. The street which was empty a moment ago was now swarming with people.
I think today is a holiday Ciri nodded with her head towards the square where the crowd was heading. Or a fair…
Geralt took a quick look.
Thats not a fair.
Ah… Ciri stood up in her stirrups and looked around. So its…
A execution he confirmed. The most popular post-war entertainment. What are the reasons Ciri?
For desertion treason cowardice before the enemy she recited fluently. And for economic crimes.
Supplying the army with mouldy biscuits said the witcher. During the war an enterprising merchant can easily get into trouble.
This does not look like the execution of a huckster Ciri pulled on Kelpies reins submerging herself in the middle of the crowd Look the scaffolding is covered with cloth and the executioner has a new clean hood. He is executing someone important perhaps a noble. So it could be cowardice in the face of the enemy…
Toussaint Geralt shook his head did not have an army that faced the enemy. No Ciri I guess this has to do with the economy. The condemned is probably guilty of some scam in a wine shop and damaged the foundation for the local economy. Lets go Ciri. We dont need to watch this spectacle.
How do you expect me to move?
Indeed it was impossible to keep riding. They had become stuck in the crowd gathering in the square and were unable to make their way to the other side of the market.
Geralt looked back and swore. He discovered that they could not even turn around people clogged the streets behind them. The crowd carried them like a river but stopped in front of a solid wall of halberds standing around the gallows.
Here they come! Someone shouted and the crowd surged like a waved picking up the cry. Here they come!
The pounding of hooves and the rattle of a cart were fully covered by the buzz of the crowd which sounded like the hum of bumblebees. So they were caught completely by surprise by the appearance of a cart from an alley drawn by two horses. On the cart trying to maintain his balance with difficult was…
Dandelion… Ciri groaned.
Geralt suddenly felt ill. Very ill.
Its Dandelion Ciri said uneasily. Its him.
This is an injustice thought the witcher. A damn injustice. This cannot be. This should not be. I know I was stupid and naive to believe that after all I had endured and experienced that destiny owed me. It was not only stupid but egocentric. But I am aware there is no need for destiny to persuade me. To prove it to me. Especially in this way. This is an injustice.
It cannot be Dandelion he said flatly staring at Roachs mane.
Its him she said again. Geralt we have to do something.
What he asked bitterly. Tell me what?
The guard driving the cart treated Dandelion fairly with surprising civility without brutality even deferentially as much as they could afford. At the foot of the steps to the gallows they untied his hands. The poet nonchalantly scratched his ass and without hesitation began to climb the steps.
One of the steps creaked suddenly and began to sag. Dandelion barely managed to keep his balance.
Damn! He exclaimed. This needs to be fixed! Youll end up killing someone with these stairs! That would be a disaster!
Once Dandelion reached the gallows two of the executioners henchmen in leather vests grabbed him. The executioner a hulk with arms as wide as the bastions of a castle watched the condemned through the slits cut in his hood. Nearby stood a man in rich though mournful black clothing. He face was no less mournful.
Citizens of Beauclair and people from the surrounding countryside he read in a troubled voice from parchment. Notice is hereby given that Julian Alfred Pankratz Viscount de Lettenhove aka Dandelion…
Pankratz what? Ciri asked in a whisper.
…according to the Supreme Court ruling of this County has been found guilty of all crimes offences and misdeed of which he was accused insulting Her Majesty treason of the state and dishonouring the establishment of the nobility through perjury libel and slander also for dissipation and indecency furthermore obscenity and whoredom. The Tribunal had decided that Viscount Julian et cetera et cetera shall receive the following punishment – First mortification of his coat of arms a thick black line through his shield. Second confiscation of all his property both movable and immovable including lands forests castles and palaces…
Castles and palaces? Said the astonished witcher. What?
Dandelion snickered making it blatantly clear what he thought of the judicial decree.
Third the maximum penalty… our Ladyship Anna Henrietta Duchess of Toussaint and Castilian of Beauclair has kindly switched the penalty for the above crimes namely being dragged by horses and dismemberment by substituting it for decapitation by the axe. Let justice be done!
From the crowd came a few incoherent cries. Women standing in the first row pretended to weep and lament. Adults lifted children in their arms or put them on their shoulders that even the smallest child would not miss the up-coming spectacle. The executioners assistants rolled a stump into the centre of the scaffold covered with cloth. There was much excitement when someone swiped the wicker basket designed to collect the severed head but another was soon found.
At the foot of the scaffold four ragged urchins held out a scarf to collect the blood in. There was a great demand for this type of souvenir and good money could be earned.
Geralt Ciri said in a low voice. We have to so do something…
He did not answer.
I wish to speak to the people Dandelion said proudly.
Keep it short Viscount.
The poet walked to the edge of the scaffold and raised his arms. The crowd began to murmur and grew still.
Hey folks Dandelion called. Whats new? How are you?
Well someone from the crowd said after a moment.
Im glad nodded the poet. In that case we can begin.
Master Executioner the bailiff said pathetically. Do your duty!
The executioner approached and according to ancient custom knelt and bowed his hooded head to the condemned.
Forgive me my good man he said gloomily.
I? Dandelion said surprised. You?
Mhm.
Not for anything in the world.
Huh?
I will not forgive you for anything in the world. Why should I? Hear that joker! In a moment you will cut off my head and you want me to forgive you? Are you kidding me or what? Shame on you! In such a sad moment.
But sir said the executioner. This is the custom… It is your last duty in the world… The condemned should forgive his executioner. Good lord forgive me please…
No.
No?
No!
I will not kill him said the executioner standing up. If he will not forgive me I will not do anything.
Lord Viscount the bailiff took Dandelion by the elbow. Do not make trouble. The people are gathered waiting… Forgive him when he begs so nicely…
I will not forgive him and thats it!
Master executioner the bailiff said turning to the executioner. Can you behead him without his forgiveness? Ill repay you…
The executioner wordlessly held out his open hand as wide as a pan. The bailiff sighed pulled out a purse and poured some coins into the hand. The executioner looked and then clenched his fist. He rolled his eyes within his hood.
Okay he agreed he hid the money and walked back over to the condemned. Kneel down stubborn sir. Put your head on the block. If I want I can be stubborn and mischievous too. I can cut twice what I can do in one. Or in three.
I forgive you! Dandelion promptly shouted. I forgive you!
Thank you.
Since you have been given your pardon said the mournful bailiff return my money.
The executioner turned on his heel and raised his axe.
Move aside sir he said in an ominously hollow voice. You know that according to the rules that you must not interfere with the performance of the execution. When I chop the head blood flies.
The bailiff backed away so rapidly that he almost fell from the scaffold.
Is this right? Dandelion knelt and stretched his neck across the stump. Master? Hey Master!
What do you want?
You were kidding right? When you said you wouldnt behead me with the first blow? Youll only cut once? Right?
The executioners eyes sparkled.
Itll be a surprise he growled ominously.
The crowd suddenly parted before a rider who burst into the square on a lathered horse.
Halt! The rider called waving a large roll of parchment with a red seal. Stop the execution! On the orders of our Lady Duchess! Stop the execution! Im here to bring clemency for the accused.
Not again growled the executioner lowering his axe sullenly. Another pardon? This is getting boring.
A pardon! A reprieve! Roared the crowd. The women in the first row started wailing even louder. The children whistled and booed with disappointment.
Hush people! Shouted the bailiff and unrolled the parchment. This is the will of Duchess Anne Henrietta! In her immense goodness and to celebrate the peace of Cintra Her Ladyship has waived all charges against Julian Alfred Pankratz Viscount de Lettenhove and pardons him from execution…
My Dear Ermine Dandelion said smiling broadly.
…And orders that the above Viscount Julian et cetera promptly leave the capital and the County of Toussaint and never return because his presence is no longer welcome here and her Ladyship never wants to lay eyes on him again. You are free Viscount.
What about my property? The troubadour said indignantly. My lands forests and castles you can have but let me take my lute my horse Pegasus my one hundred and forty ducats and eighty dimes my cloak lined with duck my ring…
Shut up! Shouted Geralt pushing through the crowd on his horse. Shut up and get down here you mutton head! Ciri clear us a way! Dandelion! Did you hear what I said?
Geralt? Is that you?
Stop your questions and get down from there right now! Come here! Jump up!
They walked through the crowd and went into a gallop down a close alley. Ciri went first followed by Geralt and Dandelion riding Roach.
Whats the rush? The bard asked from behind the witcher. No one is pursuing us.
For now. The Duchess is likely to change her mind and revoke what she previously decided. Admit it – you knew you were going to get a pardon?
No I didnt Dandelion muttered. But I counted on it. My Ermine has a good heart.
Stop with the Ermine dammit. You just got pardoned for insults against Her Majesty you dont want a recurrence.
The troubadour was silent. Ciri stopped Kelpie and waited for them. When they arrived she saw Dandelion wiping tears from his eyes.
Look at him she said. A viscount…
Lets go the witcher urged. Lets get out of this town and out of the borders of this lovely country. While there is still time.
When they were almost to the border of Toussaint in sight of the mountain Gorgon an official overtook them. He brought Pegasus a saddle a lute and Dandelions ring. He did not listen to the question on the hundred and forty ducats.
He ignored the bards plea to give a kiss to the Duchess with a straight face.
They followed the course of the Sansretour until it became a small stream. They bypassed Belhaven.
They camped in the valley of Newi. In a place that the witcher and the bard remembered well.
Dandelion lasted a long time without asking questions.
But finally they had to tell him everything. And sit with him in silence. During the hard painful silence that reigned when all was said.
At noon the next day they were on the slopes of Riedburne. The peace was prevailing throughout the area. People were trusting and accommodating. They felt safe.
At the crossroads gallows were laden with corpses.
They passed through towns on their way towards Dol Angra.
Dandelion Geralt just now noticed what he should have noticed a while ago. Your priceless tube! Your memoirs. The courier didnt bring it its still in Toussaint.
I left it the poet said indifferently. In Ermines dressing room under a pile of coats clothes and corsets. And they can stay there for centuries.
Do you want to explain it?
Theres nothing to explain. In Toussaint I had enough time to carefully read everything that I had written.
And what?
Ill write it again. From the beginning.
I understand said Geralt. Youre a lousy writer as well as a royal favourite. To put it bluntly what you touch you screw up. Half a century and you still have the possibility of correcting and re-writing but not for the Duchess. What a shame a lover driven away. Yes yes there is no reason to make faces! Being married to the Duchess of Toussaint was not written for you Dandelion.
That remains to be seen.
Do not count on me.
Nobody asked you anything. But I can tell you that my Ermine has a good heart and is a very forgiving woman. It is true that she was unnerved when she caught me with the young Baroness Nique… But surely she has calmed down she will realise that I was not made for monogamy. Shell forgive me and be waiting…
You are hopelessly stupid Geralt said and Ciri nodded vigorously to indicate she felt the same way.
I will not argue with you Dandelion said offended. Its an intimate matter. But I am sure that she will forgive me. Ill write a touching ballad or sonnet Ill sent it to Toussaint and…
Have mercy!
Oh you dont want to talk about it. Come on lets go! Forward Pegasus! Forward!
They rode.
It was the month of May.
Because of you the witcher said reproachfully we had to run away from Toussaint like outlaws or bandits. I did not have any time to see…
Fringilla Vigo? You would not have seen her. She left shortly after your departure In January. She simply disappeared.
I did not mean her Geralt coughed looking over at Ciri who was listening. I wanted to see Reynart. To introduce him to Ciri…
Dandelion bowed his head.
The good knight Reynart de Bois-Fresnes Dandelion said fell in late February when facing some invaders near the border fortress of Vedette near the Cervantesa Pass. Anarietta bestowed on him posthumously…
Shut up please.
Dandelion was silent and incredibly obedient.
May continued and grew. The intense yellow thistle in meadows disappeared replaced by blooming white fluffy dandelions.
It was very green and warm. The air after brief thunderstorms became hot dense and sticky as barley porridge.
On the twenty-sixth of May they crossed the Yaruga on a new white resin scented bridge. Remnants of the old bridges black burnt charred piles were still visible in the water and on the shore.
Ciri began to get restless.
Geralt knew why. He knew her intentions her plans and arrangement with Yennefer. He was ready. Yet the thought of the painful parting stung his heart. As if in his chest a poisonous scorpion had awakened.
At the crossroads of the village of Koprivince was an inn burned during the war and next to it stood a hundred year old oak now in bloom. The population of the whole area even from distant Spall regularly used the oak tress low hanging branches to hung tablets and posters with all kinds of information. It served the people as communication. The tree was known as the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil.
Ciri you start from that side Geralt ordered dismounting form his saddle. Dandelion you look from the other side.
The branches draped with tablets swayed in the light wind and clattered and bumped into each other.
As was usual after a war a lot of the messages were for missing family members. Quite a few of the messages were along the lines of – Come back all is forgiven there were listings for erotic massage and related services in surrounding villages and towns and lots of news and advertising.
Hung here and there were love letters next to denunciations both signed and anonymous.
They found there tablets containing philosophical considerations – either incomprehensible absurd obscene or disgusting.
Hey Dandelion called. The castle of Rastburg needs a witcher. They offer great rewards. Comfortable accommodation and delicious meals are provided. Any interest Geralt?
Not at all.
Ciri found the message she had been looking for.
She announced to the witcher what he had long been expecting.
Im going to Vengerberg Geralt she repeated. Dont give me that look. You know that I have an obligation. Yennefer is calling me. She is waiting there.
I know.
And you are going to Rivia to your secret meeting…
Its a surprise he interrupted. It isnt a secret.
Okay a surprise. I meanwhile will go to Vengerberg and solve everything Ill pick up Yennefer and in six days we will see you in Rivia. I asked you not to give me that look. We do not have to say goodbye like it is forever. It will only be six days. Goodbye.
Goodbye Ciri.
In Rivia in six days she insisted once again turning Kelpie about.
She kicked her into a gallop and was quickly out of sight. Geralt felt as if icy claws were clawing at his stomach.
Six days Dandelion repeated thoughtfully. From here to Vengerberg and then back to Rivia… That will total about two hundred and fifty miles… Thats impossible Geralt. Of course with that magical mare she can travel three times faster than us. But even a magical mare must need to rest. And Ciris mysterious issue must be resolved. Come on its impossible…
For Ciri the witcher cut him off nothing is impossible.
But…
She is no longer the girl you knew Geralt did not let him finish.
Dandelion was silent for a long time.
I have a strange feeling…
Be quiet. Dont say anything. Im begging you.
May ended. They were approaching the new moon the moon was just a sliver. They rode towards the mountains visible on the horizon.
It was a typical post-war landscape. Among the fields rose graves and burial mounds in the lush spring grass were white skulls and skeletons. On the branches of trees hung corpses and along the road waiting for the beggars to weaken sat wolves.
Grass did not grow on the vast stretches of blackness where past fires had burned.
Yet many of the villages and settlements where only ruins had remained had started to rebuild. Around them was the sounds of axes and hammers hammering and saws cutting. Near the ruins were women working the scorched earth with their hoes. Some stumbling dragged ploughs behind them the straps cutting into their shoulders.
I have a vague feeling said Dandelion that something is not as it should be. Theres something missing… Do you have the same feeling Geralt?
Huh?
Something here is not normal.
Nothing here is normal Dandelion. Nothing.
It was a hot night black with no wind lit by only distant flashes of lightning and upset by the rumour of thunder. Geralt and Dandelion camped and watched the horizon to the west glow red with fires. It was not long until the breeze picked up and brought the smell of smoke. And snippets of sound.
They heard women crying and the wailing of children and the sound of their murderers howling.
Dandelion did not say anything but kept throwing glances at the witcher. But the witcher did not move did not even turn his head. His face was like stone.
In the morning they went on their way. Rising above the forest was a wisp of smoke which they did not look at.
Later that day they encountered a column of settlers.
The column moved in a long slow march. They carried small bundles. They were completely silent. Men boys women children. They did not utter a cry or a word of complaint. Not a cry or groan of despair. Their cries and despair were mirrored in their eyes.
The empty eyes of aggrieved people. Deprived battered and expelled.
Who are these people? Dandelion said not paying attention to the eyes of the officer who watched over the displaced people. Why are they forced to leave?
Nilfgaardians replied a young lieutenant from his saddle no older than eighteen. Nilfgaardian settlers. They settled on our land like cockroaches. And we are sweeping them away like cockroaches as agreed in the peace treaty of Cintra.
He spat and looked disdainfully at the troubadour and the witcher.
And if it was up to me Id not let these bugs live.
And if it was up to me said a sergeant with a grey moustache regarding his youthful companion with disrespect Id let them work in peace on their farms and lands. I would never expel a good farmer from this country. I would love to see agriculture prosper. So we will not go hungry.
Youre a real blockhead Sergeant the young Lieutenant scolded. They are of Nilfgaard! These people do not know our language our culture or have our blood. For the small joy of having agriculture we would be taking a snake to our breast. We would have traitors ready to attack from behind. Or do you think this peace with the Black Ones will last forever. No no they go back to where they came from… Eh soldier! There one goes with a cart! Grab him quickly!
The order was carried out eagerly. With the help of fists heels and sticks.
Dandelion coughed.
The young officer measured they suspiciously.
You are not from Nilfgaard?
Gods forbid swallowed the troubadour.
Many of the women and children passing in front of them moved like puppets with empty eyes swollen faces and bruised bare legs showing through torn skirts. Some had to be supported as they walked. Dandelion looked at Geralts face and began to panic.
Its time to be on our way he muttered. Farewell gentlemen.
The young officer did not even turn his head intrigued by monitoring the refugees.
The column meandered slowly to the south. From somewhere behind them they heard a high desperate scream from a female.
Geralt no Dandelion whispered. Do not interfere stay out of it…
The witcher turned and looked at the poet as if he did not know him.
Meddle in it? He shrugged. Save someone? Give my life for noble principles and ideals? No Dandelion not anymore.
On a restless night illuminated by lightning the witcher again awakened from a dream. This time he was not sure if it was one hideous nightmare or if it was a series of nightmares.
Again over the remains of the fire a light arose pulsating and frightening the horses. Again inside that light appeared a castle with columns and a table at which sat women.
Two other women were there standing calmly. One black and white and the other black and grey.
Yennefer and Ciri.
The witcher moaned in his sleep.
Yennefer was right when she did not allow her to wear male clothing. Ciri would have felt foolish dressed as a boy among these elegant ladies. She was glad that she gave in to the combination of black and grey it flattered her and she could felt the approval when they saw the puffy sleeves and clinched waist and the small brooch in the shape of a rose.
Come closer please.
Ciri shivered slightly. It was not just the sound of the voice. Yennefer as it turned out was right about her neckline. Ciri had insisted though and now she had the impression that she could feel a draft on her breast all the way down to her navel and was covered in goose bumps.
Closer still said the dark-haired and dark-eyed woman whom Ciri remembered from the island of Thanedd. And though Yennefer had taught her all the names of the women she would meet in this castle Ciri immediately though of her as Lady Owl.
We welcome you Lady Owl said. To the Lodge in Montecalvo Ciri.
Ciri bowed as instructed by Yennefer politely but without lowering her eyes modestly like a maiden.
It was answered with a sincere smile from Triss Merigold and a nod and a friendly look from Margarita Laux-Antille. The looks from the other women where hard as augers. As the blade of a piercing spear.
Sit down Lady owl nodded towards a seat. No not you Yennefer! Only her. You Yennefer are not an invited guest but are summoned to be tried and punished as a wrongdoer. Youll stand for as long as it takes the Lodge to decide your fate.
In a twinkling of an eye Ciri ended protocol.
In that case I will stand also she said in a loud voice. I have not come as a guest. I too was summoned to decide my fate. Thats the first thing. The second thing is that Yennefers fate is linked with mine. We are inextricably linked and that cannot be changed… With all due respect.
Margarita Laux-Antille smile and looked her in the eyes. The simple yet elegant Assire var Anahid a Nilfgaardian with a slightly aquiline nose nodded and tapped her fingers gently on the tables surface.
Philippa said a woman with a silver-fox boa around her neck. I think that in this respect we should not go to extremes. At this point it is not necessary. This is the round table of the Lodge and all who sit at it are equals – even when one of us is on trial. I think that we can agree…
She did not finish she glanced at all the sorceresses. One by one they all nodded their heads in agreement – Margarita Triss Assire Sabrina Glevissig Keira Metz and both elves.
Only the second Nilfgaardian the dark-haired Fringilla Vigo did not give an affirmative nod she was pale as death as she stared at Yennefer.
So be it Philippa Eilhart waved her hand. Sit both of you. But know that I am against it. But the unity of the Lodge and its interests are most important. The Lodge is everything the rest is nothing. I hope you understand Ciri?
Perfectly Ciri said not looking away from her gaze. Especially since I am supposed to be the nothing.
The beautiful queen of the elves Francesca Findabair laughed.
Congratulations Yennefer she said in her hypnotically deep and melodious voice. I noticed you left your mark. This is gold. I recognise the school.
Its easy to recognise Yennefer looked around with fiery eyes because it is the school of Tissaia de Vries.
Tissaia de Vries is dead Lady Owl said calmly. We mourn her and gladly. Her death however was a turning point. Now is a new time and big changes are coming. You Ciri you were once Princess Cirilla of Cintra but fate has now given you a different role. Surely you already know what it is.
I know said Ciri not listening to the warning hiss from Yennefer. Vilgefortz explained it to me! He was going to stick a glass tube between my legs. If this is to be the fate that awaits me then thank you very much.
Philippas dark eyes blazed with frosty fury. But it was Sile de Tancarville that spoke next to Ciri.
You still have a lot to learn girl she said covering her neck with her silver-fox boa. Many of the things you have seen and heard you will need to unlearn. Alone or with assistance. You have acquired a lot of bad habits no doubt because of the evil you have experienced in this world. But this is childish stubbornness and now you cant see when someone only has your best interests at heart. You lash out around you with your claws like a wild kitten so you have given us no choice. We will take you by the neck and treat you like a child without a second thought. Because we are older wiser and we know everything about what was what is and we know a lot about what will be. We will take you by the neck like a child so one day when you are a wise cat you will sit here at this table among us. One of us. No! Not a word! Do not dare open your mouth while Sile de Tancarville speaks.
The sorceress from Kovirs voice was sharp and penetrating as a knife scratching on iron and hung over the table. Ciri was not the only one to shrink and draw her head down between her shoulders but the other magicians of the Lodge as well with maybe the exception of Philippa Francesca and Assire. And Yennefer.
You are right said Sile adjusting the boa around her neck again you were called to Montecalvo to meet your fate. But you were not right when you complained that you are nothing. You are everything you are the worlds future. At this point in time you cannot even understand because you are just a kitten a child who sees everyone as Vilgefortz or Emhyr var Emreis. At this point it is not worth explaining that you are wrong. This is all for your sake and for the sake of the world. There will time for such explanations later. For now you do not want to hear the voice of reason and you riposte every argument with a childs stubbornness. So now youll be taken by the neck. Im done. Philippa declare the girls fate.
You are coming with me Lady Owl said breaking the heavy silence and Sile to Kovir to Pont Vanis the summer capital of the kingdom. As you are no longer Cirilla of Cintra during the course of the audience you will be presented as an adept of magic being protected by us. At that audience you will meet a very wise king Esterad Thyssen. You will meet his wife the Queen Zuleyka a person of singular nobility and goodness. You will also meet their son and heir Prince Tancred.
Ciri was beginning to understand and rolled her eyes. Lady Owl did not miss that detail.
Yes she confirmed. First of all you must impress prince Tancred. Because you are going to become his lover and give him a child.
If you were still Cirilla of Cintra Philippa continued after a long pause still the daughter of Pavetta and granddaughter of Calanthe you would become Prince Tancreds legal wife. Youd be the princess and later the queen of Poviss and Kovir. Unfortunately and I tell you with genuine regret fate has deprived you of everything. Including your future. You will only be his mistress. His favourite.
In name interjected Sile and formally. In practice we will in fact endeavour to ensure that you are beside Tancred with the status of princess and later eventually queen. Naturally we will need your help. Tancred has to want to have you by his side. Day and night. We will show you how to stimulate that desire but it is up to your to bear the fruit of our teachings.
All this is not important at the end of the day said Lady Owl. The important thing is that you get pregnant to Tancred as soon as possible.
Yeah sure muttered Ciri.
Yours and Tancreds child Philippa watched here with dark eyes will ensure the future and status of this Lodge. Take note that it will be a great thing. You will be a part of it because right after the birth you will sit with us at this table. We will teach you. You are one of us even if you do not want to admit it yet.
On the island of Thanedd Ciri overcame the tightness in her throat you said I was a mindless tool even a monster Lady Owl and now you say that I am one of you.
There is not that much difference the Daisy of the valley said in a ringing voice. We me luned are all monsters. Each in our own way. Is that not right Lady Owl?
Philippa shrugged.
That ugly scar on your face Sile said indifferently we will magically remove or disguise. You will be a beautiful and mysterious woman and I guarantee that Tancred Thyssen will go crazy for you. We will have to invent some personal details. Cirilla is a nice name and not so rare so you can keep it. But you still need a last name. I would not be against it if you used mine.
Or mine Lady Owl said covering the smile on the corner of her lips. Cirilla Eilhart also sounds nice.
That name the hall rang with the silvery voice of the elven queen is pretty in any combination. And each of us here would love to have a daughter like you Zireael Swallow with the eyes of a hawk. You are the body and the blood of Lara Dorren. Each of us would give everything even this Lodge and the fate of the kingdoms around the world to have such a daughter. However it is impossible. We know that it is impossible. So we envy Yennefer.
Thank you Lady Philippa Ciri said after a few moments squeezing the head of the sphinxes in her hands. I also feel honoured with the proposal to take the surname de Tancarville. However it seems to me that my new last name is the only thing that I can choose for myself I thank the two mistresses. But I want to be called Cirilla of Vengerberg daughter of Yennefer.
Ha! A sorceress flashed her teeth who Ciri guessed to be Sabrina Glevissig of Kaedwen. Tancred Thyssen will be a fool if he does not marry her. If he instead choose another princess he would be a fool and blind not to recognise the diamond among the glass beads Yenna I envy you. And you know how sincere I can be with my envy.
Yennefer thanked her with a gesture. Without a shadow of a smile.
So Philippa said all is taken care of.
No said Ciri.
Francesca Findabair snorted quietly. Sile de Tancarville raised her head and her expression hardened.
I have to think about it Ciri said. Meditate. Put my thoughts in order. Calmly. And when Im done I will come back here to Montecalvo and come before this Lodge and discuss what has been decided.
Sile moved her lips as if she had noticed a bad taste in her mouth and wanted to spit it out immediately. But she remained silent.
I have to meet continued Ciri with the witcher Geralt in the city of Rivia. I promised that I would be there and that Yennefer would accompany me. I will fulfil my promise with or without your consent. Lady Rita here knows that when I go to Geralt I can always find a hole in the wall.
Margarita Laux-Antille nodded with a smile.
I need to talk to Geralt. Say goodbye to him. And tell him the truth. You should know one thing ladies. When we left castle Stygga leaving behind their dead and ours I asked Geralt if it was all over if we had won if evil was defeated then good had prevailed. He did not answer he just smiled a sad smile. I thought it was from fatigue and the sorrow of leaving all his friends buried under the walls. Only now I know what his smile meant. It was a sympathetic smile at the naivety of a child who believed that killing Vilgefortz and Bonhart represented the triumph of good over evil. I have to try and convince Geralt that what you ladies want to do with me differs substantially from what Vilgefortz wanted to do with his glass tube. Ill try and explain to him the differences between castle Montecalvo and castle Stygga although Vilgefortz thought he was doing was for the good of the world and you ladies also do for the good of the world. I know it is not going to be easy to convince an old wolf like Geralt. Geralt will say that Im a brat and can easily be fooled into doing noble things. But I have to try. It is important that he understand it that he accepts it. It is very important. Also for you ladies.
You did not understand Sile de Tancarville snapped sharply. Youre still a snotty nosed girl who replaced whining with arrogance. The only thing that gives me some hope is the acumen of your mind. You learn quickly. Believe me you will soon laugh at the stupid things you have said here. Relative to your trip to Rivia I express my strong opposition. It is a matter of principle to prove to you that I Sile de Tancarville never talk to the wind. That I can grab the necks of the rebellious. It is for your own good to learn discipline.
Therefore let us resolve this issue said Philippa Eilhart placing her hands on the table. Let each of us express our opinion. Should we allow this arrogant maid Ciri to travel to Rivia? To meet with the witcher for whom there is no place in her life? Are we to allow this sentimentality which we will soon have to rid her of? Sile is against. What about the other ladies?
I am also against Sabrina Glevissig announced. Also as a matter of principle. The girl I like. I like her arrogance and stubbornness it is better than flabby softness. I have nothing against her pleading. I have no doubt that she would return - I respect her word. But the girl has dared to threaten. So let her know that threats are not to be tolerated.
Im against it said Keira Metz. For purely practical reasons. I also like the girl and Geralt delivered me out of the hands of danger on Thanedd. It is a sentiment that I long ago got rid of but I do not deny that it was pleasant to me. I could repay him this way. But will not. Because you are wrong Sabrina. This girl is a witcheress and is trying to be smarter than us. In short she is just trying to get away.
Does anyone here Yennefer said ominously dragging her words dare doubt the word of my daughter?
Be silent Yennefer Philippa hissed. Do not talk or Ill lose patience. We have two votes against. Lets listen to the others.
I am in favour of letting her go said Triss Merigold. I know her and can vouch for her. I would also if permitted accompany her on this trip. To help if I may in her meditations and reflections. And with her conversation with Geralt.
I also vote for her Margarita said with a smile. You may wonder at my motivations ladies but I do it for Tissaia de Vries. If Tissaia was among us she would not agree that in order to maintain the unity of the Lodge it is necessary to use coercive methods or restriction of personal freedom.
I vote for her said Francesca Findabair adjusting the lace at her neckline. I have many reasons but I do not wish to explain them.
I vote for her said Ida Emean aep Sivney. So my heart dictates.
Im against it Assire var Anahid said dryly. I do not decide out of lack of sympathy antipathy or principled reasons. I fear for her life. Under the protection of the Lodge Ciri is safe and on the route to Rivia she will be an easy target. I fear those that stole her identity and even her name still dont think that its enough.
We have Sabrina said sarcastically yet to know the opinion of Lady Fringilla Vigo. I guess that it is obvious. We all remember the castle Rhys-Rhune.
I am grateful for the reminder Fringilla cocked her head proudly. I am for Ciri. To prove the admiration and affection I have for the girl. I also do it for the witcher Geralt of Rivia without which the girl would not be sitting here today. To save Ciri he went to the edge of the world and fought everyone trying to prevent him - even himself. It would be shameful to deny him a meeting with his daughter.
I have not heard here any shameful acts Sabrina said cynically. But a lot of naive sentimentality. Just such sentimentality that we want to eradicate from the girl. The results are that the scales have settled in deadlock. We have not decided anything. We need to vote again. I suggest that this time we do it secretly.
Why?
All looked at the one who spoke - at Yennefer.
I am still a member of the Lodge said Yennefer. I have not been deprived of membership you have not put anyone else in my place so I have the right to vote. Certainly I know how I will vote. My vote therefore pushes the scales over and settles the matter.
Your insolence Sabrina said lacing her fingers together loaded with onyx rings borders on bad taste Yennefer.
If I was in your place madam I would keep a discreet silence Sile added gravely. And be fearful of another vote to deal with you.
I voted for Ciri Francesca said but you Yennefer I have to call to order. You ran away from the Lodge refusing to cooperate. But you have responsibilities and obligations debts that you have to repay the verdict must be made. Otherwise you would not have been allowed to cross the threshold of Montecalvo.
Yennefer grabbed Ciri who was dying to get up and scream. Finally without resistance Ciri dropped back into her chair in silence. Lady Owl suddenly rose from her seat dominating the whole table.
Yennefer she proclaimed loudly you are not entitled to a vote that is clear. But I am. I have heard all the voices present. I guess I will finally make my vote.
How do you vote Philippa? Sabrina frowned.
Philippa Eilhart looked across the table. She met Ciris green eyes and stared at them.
The bottom of the pond was a multicoloured mosaic the coloured tiles appeared to move.
Sitting on the pond creating shadows were the broad leaves of water lilies hiding goldfish.
The waters surface reflected the dark eyes of a little girl her long hair floated on the water.
The girl had forgotten the whole world laying on the edge of the pool with her little hands in the water.
She went to try and touch those gold and red fish. The fish approached her fingers and palms curiously circling around them but she couldnt catch them. They remained as elusive as light and shadow as the water itself. The dark-eyed girl fingers clutched emptiness.
Philippa!
It was the most beloved voice in the world. And yet she was not a little girl now.
Furthermore she was not looking into the water. The water lilies fish and reflection were gone.
Philippa!
Philippa! Sile de Tancarvilles sharp voice pulled her from her reflections. We are waiting.
Through the open window cam the cold wind of spring. Philippa Eilhart shuddered. Death she thought. Death has passed by my side.
This Lodge she said at last in a firm voice is to decide the fate of the world. So this Lodge must reflect the world. Here equilibrium and wisdom does not always mean cold and selfish calculation and vileness and sentimentality is not always naive. On one hand iron discipline and on the other responsibility resistance to violence gentleness and trust. Cool reason… And heart.
I she said into the silence that reigned after her introduction cast the last vote. I will take into account one more thing. An element that without balancing anything balances everything.
Following her gaze everyone looked at the wall to a mosaic of many multicolour tiles depicting the snake Uroboros biting its own tail.
That thing she continued staring with her dark eyes at Ciri is destiny in which I Philippa Eilhart have only begun to believe in recently which I have only recently begun to understand. Destiny is not the way to providence or comfortable fatalism. Destiny is hope. I am full of hope that it will become what we want to happen so I give my vote to Ciri - Child of Destiny Child of Hope
In the pillared hall of Montecalvo the was silence for a long time. From outside of the window came the hunting cry from a sea eagle.
Lady Yennefer Ciri whispered. It means…
Come my daughter Yennefer whispered back. Geralt is waiting for is and it is a long road ahead.
Geralt awoke suddenly and sat up. He heard the echoing cry of a sea eagle.
Then the witcher and the sorceress were married at a glorious wedding. They stayed for a long time and ate honey and drank wine.
They lived happily ever after but very briefly. He died of a heart attack. She died soon after of what the story does not mention. They say that it was with regret and longing but who would believe in such fairy tales.
Flourens Delannoy
Fairytales and Stories
CHAPTER TWELVE
It was the sixth day after the new moon of June when they reach Rivia.
The emerged from the woods and appeared on the side of a hill. At the foot of the hill suddenly without warning flashed the mirror surface of the lake of Loc Eskalott which the valley took its name from. In its waters were reflected the shapes of Mahakam Massif fir trees and the larch-covered hills of Craag Ros. At the lakes peninsula was Castle Rivia the winter residence of the kings of Lyria and at the southern tip of Loc Eskalott was situated the city.
So here we are Dandelion confirmed the obvious fact. Destiny has brought us here again the circle has closed. I dont see the blue and white banner on the castle towers so Queen Meve must not be present. I dont think that she has forgiven your desertion…
Believe me Dandelion Geralt interrupted him guiding his horse down the slope. I do not care if she has forgiven me or wont forgive me…
Next to the city near the entrance gate stood a colourful tent reminiscent of a cake. In front of the tent on a pole hung a white shield with a red chevron. Under the raised part of the tent stood a king in full armour and a white tabard the same as the shield. The knight with a penetrating and challenging look stared at the women passing by before him with sacks of coal charcoal deadwood and barrels of pitch. Upon seeing Geralt and Dandelion approach on horseback his eyes lit up with hope.
The Lady of your heart Geralt thwarted the hopes of the knight with a chilling voice whoever she is is the most beautiful and virtuous of all women from the Yaruga to the Buina.
On my honour the knight reluctantly answered. You speak the truth sir.
A blonde girl in a silver studded leather jacket vomited in the middle of the street bent in half holding the stirrup of a grey mare. Two colleagues of the girl in identical clothing with swords on their backs and headbands holding back their hair vulgarly insulted passers-by with their slurred speech. Both were more than drunk weaving on their feet and clutching to the sides of horses tied to a pole set in front of the inn.
Do we really need to go in there? Asked Dandelion. Inside there are bound to be more like them.
The meeting is arranged here remember? This is the Cock and Bull inn which was written on the tablet.
The blonde girl again leaned forward in her next spasm of vomiting. The mare snorted and shied so the girl fell to the ground landing in her own vomit.
What are you staring at asshole? Yelled one of the colleagues. White hair!
Geralt whispered Dandelion. Please dont do anything stupid.
Dont worry.
They tied their horses to the berth at the front of the inn. The young men were ignoring them busy shouting at a townswoman passing down the road with a child. They did not like what they saw.
The first thing that drew the eye when they entered the inn was the inscription - CHEF WANTED. The second was the large painting on the wall showing a bearded monster with an axe dripping blood. The sign underneath it read - Mahakam Dwarf - vile traitor.
Dandelion lacked no reason to be scared. The only customers in the establishment apart from some winos who drank with dignity and a couple of prostitutes were people wearing leather garments and with swords hanging from their backs.
There were eight of them in total of both sexes but they made enough fuss to be eighteen. They constantly shouted insults and blasphemes.
I recognise you gentlemen. I know who you are said the innkeeper. I have a message for you. You have to go to the tavern called Wirsings.
Thats a good tavern Dandelion rejoiced.
Well then go and take advantage of their establishment the innkeeper said drying glasses with his apron. If you dont like my place take your business elsewhere. But I tell you that the Elms quarter only dwarves and non-humans inhabit there.
So what? Geralt blinked.
Well you probably know this the innkeeper shrugged but the one who left the message for you was a dwarf. If it pleases you to be dealing with such people… that is your business. You gentlemen know whose company you prefer.
We are very picky when it comes to company said Dandelion nodding his head towards the table with the men and women in leather jackets and headbands holding back their hair.
But it is not kind to point out something under someones nose.
The innkeeper placed a freshly dried glass on the counter and looked at them scowling.
You have to be more understanding he said in an emphatic tone. The young people need to let off steam. It is well know that young people should let off steam. The war has mistreated them. Their fathers died…
And their mothers are whoring finished Geralt his voice as cold as an icy mountain stream. I understand. I embody tolerance. At least I try. Come on Dandelion.
Go ahead then with all due respect said the innkeeper without any respect. Just dont complain that I didnt warn you. In these times it is easy to get fleeced in the dwarven quarter. Just…
Just what?
Just nothing. This is not my thing.
Come on Geralt said Dandelion to the witcher he had started to notice the war orphans those not completely drunk eyes begin to glitter with the use of fisstech.
Goodbye innkeeper. Who knows maybe someday Ill visit your business. When you take down the sign in the entrance.
And which one of the signs does not please you gentlemen? The innkeeper frowned and glared at them. Huh? The one with the dwarf?
No the one about the chef.
Three young people got up from the table swaying on their feet evidently with the intention of intercepting them. Two boys and a girl in black leather jackets. With swords on their backs.
Geralt did not slow he walked towards them his face and eyes were cold and completely indifferent.
The young people at the very last moment parted and retreated. Dandelion noticed the stench of beer. Sweat. And fear.
They have to get used to it the witcher said as they entered the street. They have to adapt.
Sometimes it is difficult.
This is not an argument Dandelion.
The air was hot stick and as thick as soup.
Outside in front of the inn two young men in black jackets helped the blonde girl wash in the horse trough. The girl spat snorted and stammered trying to explain that she felt better and that she needed a drink. That they would definitely go the market stalls for entertainment but not before a drink.
Her name was Nadia Esposito. The name has been recorded in the annals. And went down in history.
But Geralt and Dandelion did not know this yet. Nor did the girl.
The streets of Rivia were alive with a great buzz and what appeared to be locals completely absorbed the visiting traders. It seemed that everyone there traded everything trying to change one thing for something else. From everywhere came the cacophony of the sounds of products being advertised fierce haggling and from both sides the sounds of people being accused of fraud theft chicanery and other sins which had nothing to do with trade.
Before coming to the Elms district Geralt and Dandelion received many interesting proposals. Offered to them was among other things - an astrolabe a tin trumpet and decorative cutlery adorned with the Frangipani family crest shares in a copper mine a jar of leeches a tattered tome entitled The Miracle or Head of Medusa a pair of breeding ferrets an elixir to increase potency and even - for a negotiated price - a not too young not too thin and not very clean bride.
A black-bearded dwarf with an unprecedented brazenness was trying to convince them to buy a cheap mirror in a frame which he claim to be one of the magical Cambuscan mirrors.
At that moment a stone was thrown which knocked the goods from his hand.
Mangy kobold! Cried the assailant a dirty barefoot urchin who was running away. Non human! Bearded Goat!
I hope your gut rots human worm! Roared the dwarf in return. I hope it will rot and come out your ass!
People watched in grim silence.
The district of the Elms was located on the shore of the lake in a cove where grew alders weeping willows and of course elms. Here everything was much quieter and calm nobody was buying anything and nobody wanted to sell.
From the lake a breeze was blowing which was especially nice for the pair after escaping the suffocating stench and flies of the market streets.
They soon found the Wirsing tavern. It was the first on the street and the saw it with ease.
The porch was covered in climbing roses and under the roof overgrown with moss where a swallows nests hung were two dwarves.
Geralt and Dandelion said one of the dwarves belching loudly. You rogues have come as expected.
Geralt dismounted.
Hail Yarpen Zigrin. Good to see you Zoltan Chivay.
They were the only guests in the pub that smelled of garlic spices and something indescribable but pleasant. They sat at a heavy table overlooking the lake which through the glass window next to the table appeared mysterious magical and romantic.
Where is Ciri? Yarpen Zigrin asked bluntly. I hope nothing…
No Geralt quickly interrupted him she is on her way. You will see her soon. Well bearded storyteller tell me what is new.
What did I tell you? Yarpen said sarcastically. What did I tell you Zoltan? He returns from the end of the world where he if you believe the rumours waded through blood killed dragons and overthrew an empire. And he asks how we are going. The same witcher.
What smells so good? Dandelion said sniffing.
Lunch Yarpen Zigrin said. Meat. Dont ask us Dandelion where we came by the meat.
No Im not asking because I know the joke.
Dont be a bore.
Where did the meat come from?
He came alone to find us.
And now seriously Yarpen said wiping his eyes though the joke was in fact very old. With regard to the food we are in a critical situation as always after a war. The meat is rarely seen even poultry fish is difficult to find as well… It is just as bad with flour potatoes and legumes… Farms were burned along with their stores ponds were emptied and the fields are fallow…
Production has stagnated added Zoltan. There is no transport. The only thing that works is usury and barter. Have you seen the bazaar? The rich alongside the poor selling and bartering the last remnants of his property and amassed fortunes…
If we get a poor harvest before this winter then people will die of starvation.
Is it really that bad?
Coming from the south you had to pass villages and settlements. Think of in how many you heard the barking of dogs.
Bloody hell Dandelion slapped his forehead. I saw… I told you Geralt it was not normal! That something was missing! Ha! Now I realise! I did not hear any dogs! There was no…
He stopped suddenly looked towards the kitchen where the smell of garlic and spices came from and terror came into his eyes.
Dont worry Yarpen grumbled. Our meat has never barked meowed or cried for mercy. Our meat is nothing like that. It is fit for a king!
Confess dwarf!
When we received your letter and it was clear that we would see you in Rivia we were thinking Zoltan and me how we could entertain you. We were going round in circles until we felt like pissing. Then we approached the lake shore and saw that it was plagued by snails. So we took a bag and filled it to the brim with those precious molluscs.
We missed a few of them nodded Zoltan Chivay. But we were very drunk and they were very quick.
Both dwarves again burst out in laughter at the joke.
Wirsing Yarpen said pointing to the kitchen can prepare snails well as you must know that it requires a lot of science. The chef is well renowned. Before becoming a widower he and his woman owned an inn in Maribor and he cooked so well that even the King himself was a guest there. And now lets drink I say!
But first Zoltan said try some of the whitefish freshly smoked and caught from the lake.
And we are waiting for your story gentlemen said Yarpen. We are curious to hear what you experienced.
The whitefish was still warm oily and fragrant. The vodka was cold and hurt their teeth.
Dandelion went first with his flowery style colourful language and embellishments on the story full of nonsense and lies. Then the witcher spoke. He told the pure truth and spoke dry and monotonously. Dandelion could not stand it and interrupted again and again which earned him reprimands from the dwarves.
And then the story was over and there was a long silence.
For the archer Milva! Zoltan cleared his throat and raised his cup in a salute. For the Nilfgaardian. For Regis the herbalist who entertained strangers in his hut with moonshine made from mandrake. And for this Angoulême with whom I am not familiar. Let the earth rest light on them. Let them have there in the afterlife everything that they had scarce in this life. And let their names live on long in songs and stories. Lets drink.
Lets drink echoed Dandelion and Yarpen.
Lets drink thought the witcher.
Wirsing a grey-haired man pale and skin as a stick a veritable denial of a stereotypical innkeeper and master of the culinary mysteries deposited on the table a basket of white fragrant bread and a platter of snails sizzling in garlic and spices on a bed of radish leaves.
Dandelion Geralt and the dwarves dug in quickly. The meal was exquisitely tasty and very funny at the same time given the need for clumsy forceps and forks.
They ate smacking their lips eating the bread and mincing words when referring to every second snail that slipped from the forceps. Two kittens also enjoyed the meal whenever a snail slipped from the clamps and rolled on the floor.
The smell coming from the kitchen indicated that Wirsing was preparing another serving.
Yarpen Zigrin reluctantly waved his hand but realised the witcher was not going to give up.
For me there has been nothing new he said spitting out a piece of snail shell. I was in the army… Then I was selected as a bailiff. Ill do a career in politics. There is too much competition in business. In politics any fool can hold the purse of a thief. It is easy to stand out.
Well I said Zoltan Chivay gesturing with a snail am not for politics. Ill go home to my forge driven by water and steam accompanied by Figgis Merluzzo and Munro Bruys. You remember Figgis and Munro witcher?
Not just them.
Yazon Varda was killed at the Yaruga Zoltan said dryly. Quite stupidly in one of the last battles.
A pity. And Percival Schuttenbach?
The gnome? Ah hes fine. That rogue escaped the recruitment claiming his religion forbids war. And he succeeded even though everyone knows that the entire pantheon of gods and goddesses would go to war for a pickled herring. He has a jewellery shop in Novigrad. He bought my parrot Field Marshal Duda and made the bird a living advertisement. He taught him to say Diamonds! Diamonds! And it works go figure. The gnome has clientele loaded with money. But it is Novigrad! And there is money in the streets. Therefore we also want to establish a forge in Novigrad.
Those people will scribble with shit on your door Yarpen said. Throw stones through your windows. Theyll call you a damned dwarf. It doesnt matter that you are a veteran. In Novigrad youll be nothing more than a pariah.
Ill go anyway Zoltan said cheerfully. There is too much competition in Mahakam. And a lot of politicians. Lets drink for our friends. For Caleb Stratton. For Yazon Varda.
For Regan Dahlberg Yarpen added frowning. Geralt shook his head.
Regan also…
Also. In Mayena. The old Dahlberg has been left alone in this world. Ah hell enough of this! Lets drink. and hurry up with those snails because Wirsing is coming over with another pan.
The dwarves with belts unbuckled listened to Geralts story of Dandelions aristocratic romance that ended on the gallows. The poet seemed offended and did not comment. Zoltan and Yarpen almost spilt apart with laughter.
Yes yes Yarpen said finally in the words of the old song - a man breaks down in tears and the woman smiles; pleased. Some distinguish examples of that saying have joined with us around this table today. Look no further than Zoltan Chivay. With all the stories that have been told he forgot to add that he is getting married. Soon in September. The lucky woman is called Eudora Brekekes.
Breckenriggs! Zoltan emphatically corrected frowning. Im starting to get tired of correcting your pronunciation Zigrin. Take heed when I get tired of something I kick it up the ass!
Wheres the wedding? And when exactly? Dandelion said soothingly. I ask because we will come. If you invite us of course.
We have not yet reached a decision on where when or how or if we are even getting married muttered Zoltan visibly confused. Yarpen has rushed things. I think Eudora has committed but who knows what will happen? It is still bad times.
The second example of a girls omnipotence continued Yarpen is Geralt of Rivia the witcher.
Geralt pretended to be busy with a snail. Yarpen snorted.
After miraculously finding his Ciri he allows her to leave. He leaves her alone again even though as someone rightly pointed out here it is still bad times. All of this happens to the witcher because a woman wanted it. The witcher always does what this woman wants a certain Yennefer of Vengerberg. If he at least got something from the sorceress in question… But he gets nothing. The truth. As King Dezmod used to say looking at the chamber pot after relieving himself The mind cannot comprehend this.
I suggest said Geralt picking up a cup with a wry smile to drink and change the topic of conversation.
Right Zoltan and Dandelion said in unison.
Wirsing carried a third and forth platter of snails to the table. Not forgetting of course the bread and vodka. The diners were beginning to get full so it was not surprising that the toasts were becoming more frequent. Nor was there any wonder that they spoke more philosophy and with increasingly thick speech.
The evil we were fighting against insisted the witcher is a manifestation of the action of chaos and their performances aimed to disturb the order. So when evil spread the order could not reign and all that order was building fell apart and nothing was left standing. The faint glow of wisdom and the timid flame of hope embers that still retained the heat rather than flash and then die away. Darkness ensued. And the darkness was filled with fangs claws and blood.
Yarpen Zigrin stroked his beard smearing grease from the snails through it.
You speak well witcher he admitted. But as young Cerro said to King Vridnak on their first date Does it have any practical uses?
There is no ground for the existence of witchers Geralt did not smile because the struggle of Good and Evil takes place now in an entirely different field of battle in a completely different way. The evil is no longer chaotic. It is no longer a blind force unbridled which a witcher has to face a mutant as deadly as chaotic evil itself. Today Evil is governed by laws - because the laws serve them. They act in accordance with treaties and have signed for peace because some treaties allow…
Settlers to be forcefully expelled Zoltan guessed.
And not only that Dandelion added gravely. Not only that.
So what? Yarpen Zigrin sat back and folded his hands on his belly. Weve all seen something. Everyone has been pissed on. Each lost a dream. Thats what happens its always been like that and it always will be. We are the lowest nothing more than these empty shells. What do you dislike witcher? What is going on? The changes that the world is experiencing? The development? The progress?
Maybe.
Yarpen was silent for a while watching the witcher from under his bushy eyebrows.
Progress he said at last is like a herd of pigs. So that is the way you see progress and that is how you judge it. Like a herd of pigs that walk through the courtyard of the farmhouse. The existence of the herd means profit. The pork knuckles. The sausages the bacon. In short there are a number of advantages! So you shouldnt pout and complain that there is shit everywhere.
Everyone was quiet for a time weighing his heart and conscience on all matters and important issues.
I need a drink Dandelion finally said.
No one protested.
Progress Yarpen Zigrin said into the silence will in the long run brighten the darkness. The darkness will give way to the light. But not immediately. And of course not without a struggle.
Geralt staring out the window smiled at his own thoughts and dreams.
That darkness you speak of he said is a state of spirit not matter. To fight something you need to train something quite different than a witcher. It is time to start.
You will start to retrain? Is that what you were thinking?
Not at all. This job holds no interest to me. I will go into retirement.
Is that right!
Im serious. No more being a witcher.
There was a long silence broken occasionally by the furious meows of the kittens as they scratched at each other in a game.
No more being a witcher Yarpen Zigrin repeated. Ha! I dont know what to think about that as old King Dezmod said when caught cheating at cards. But I have a very bad feeling. Dandelion you have travelled with him and spent a lot of time at his side. Has he shown other symptoms of paranoia?
Okay okay said Geralt with a stony face. No more jokes as King Dezmod said when all of his guests at a feast began to go livid and croak. I have said all that I had to say. And now down to actions.
He picked up his sword which was hanging on the back of his chair.
Here is your Sihil Zoltan Chivay. I return it to you with gratitude and recognition. It has been useful. It has helped me. It has saved lives. And taken lives.
Witcher… The dwarf raised his hands in a defensive gesture. The sword is yours. I did not lend it to you I gave it to you. As a gift…
Hush Chivay. I give you back your sword. Ill no longer need it.
Quickly Yarpen said. Pour vodka into him Dandelion because he is talking like old Schrader when he fell into the mine shaft on his head. Geralt I know youve a deep temperament and a sensitive soul but do not talk such crap as you can see Yennefer is not here just us old wolves. Dont tell us old wolves stories of a witcher not needing a sword the world is not like that. You are a witcher and you will need…
No I wont Geralt gently denied. Perhaps this will surprise you old wolves but I have come to the conclusion that it is foolish to piss in the wind. That it is foolish to stick my neck out for anyone. Even if that someone pays. And no this is not an existential philosophy. Believe it but suddenly I have taken a tremendous affection for my own skin. I have come to the conclusion that it would be stupid to risk it in defence of others…
I noticed Dandelion nodded. On one hand it is smart. On the other…
There is no other.
Yennefer and Ciri Yarpen asked after a little while have something to do with your decision?
Much.
Then everything is clear Zoltan sighed. I have no clue how a master swordsman will adapt to normal life. But try as I might I cannot see you planting cabbages although I do have respect for your choice… Innkeeper! This sword is a Mahakam Rune Sihil from the Rhundurina forge itself. It was a gift. If the recipient does not want it then the one who gave it must take it back. Take it and hang it over your fireplace. Rename you inn to The Witchers Sword. Then on winter nights we can tell stories about monsters and treasure of bloody wars and bitter battles. Of death. Of deep love and unwavering friendship. About courage and honour and this sword will hang there above the listeners and inspire the storyteller. Now pour me a drink gentlemen a glass of vodka because I will continue and will be delivering profound truths and philosophies including existential ones.
They pour vodka into their glasses quietly and with dignity. They looked each other in the eye and drank. With no less dignity. Yarpen Zigrin cleared his throat looked at his audience to make sure they were sufficiently focused and dignified.
Progress he spoke with deliberation will brighten the darkness because that is what progress does like excuse the expression an ass is for shitting. Each time there will be more light and we will be less afraid of the dark and the evil that lurks in it. Perhaps the day will come when we will simply stop believing that something is hidden in the darkness. And we will laugh at that kind of fear. It will seem childish. And will bring shame! But there will always always be darkness. And evil will always be waiting in the darkness with its claws fangs and blood. And witchers will always be necessary.
They sat in meditation and silence deep in thought so deep that they did not noticed the increasing noise in the city - a sinister and menacing noise like the irritated buzzing of wasps.
They barely noticed how quiet and empty lakeside boulevard was until one person ran past then another then another.
Suddenly shouting broke out in the city and the door of Wirsings inn burst wide open and a young dwarf ran into the room. He was red with effort and had difficulty catching his breath.
What is it? Yarpen Zigrin lifted his head.
The dwarf still breathless pointed in the direction of the town. His eyes were wild.
Take a deep breath Zoltan Chivay advised. And tell us whats wrong.
Later it was claimed that the tragic events in Rivia were an unfortunate coincidence that was a spontaneous reaction a sudden and unpredictable outburst of justified anger induced by the hostility of the dwarves and elves towards the humans of the city. It was argued that is was not the humans but the dwarves that attacked first that they provoked the violence. A dwarfish heckler insulted the noble Lady Nadia Esposito a war orphan and that he used violence against her. Later when the nobles came to the defence of their friend the dwarf called upon his relatives. A fight ensued which soon became a real battle that in the twinkling of an eye engulfed the whole bazaar.
The battle degraded into a bloodbath in a massive attack from the humans against the districts occupied by the non-humans and the district of the Elms. In less than an hour between the incident at the bazaar to the intervention of the sorceresses one hundred and seventy people were killed about half of which were women and children.
This version of events is reflected in the works of Professor Emmerich Gottschalk of Oxenfurt.
But there are others who argue otherwise. How can this be spontaneous this unpredictable explosion that within minutes of there were carts on the streets of the bazaar handing out weapons among the humans? Where did the sudden righteous anger of this mob come from of who the most visible and active members at the time of the massacre were people whom nobody new and who had only come to Rivia a few days before the incident and then disappeared without a trace? Why did the military intervene so late? And why with such distaste?
Some scholars sought to interpret events in Rivia as a Nilfgaardian provocation and there were others who argued that everything had been hatched by dwarves in league with the elves. Who were killing their own to discredit the humans.
Lost among the majority of scientific voices was a theory by a young bold and eccentric lawyer who - until he was silenced - claimed that the incident in Rivia was not from secret conspiracies but ordinary and very common characteristics of the local population - ignorance xenophobia violence and profound brutalisation.
Later everyone grew bored and stopped talking about the matter altogether.
Into the cellar the witcher said grimly listening to the approaching noise and the roar of the crowd. Get into the basement dwarves! And without your stupid heroism!
Witcher Zoltan protested clutching the handle of his axe. I cannot… They are killing my brothers…
Into the cellar. Think about Eudora. Do you want her to be a widow before the wedding?
The argument worked. The dwarves ran to the cellar. Geralt and Dandelion hid the entrance with a rug. Wirsing usually pale was as white as buttermilk.
I saw a pogrom in Maribor he stammered looking at the entrance of the cellar. If they find them there…
Go to the kitchen.
Dandelion was also pale. Geralt was not surprised. Until recently it was a formless and monotonous roar but now they could pick out individual voices. The sound of them lifted the hair on his head.
Geralt moaned the poet. I have a certain resemblance to an elf…
Dont be stupid.
Clouds of smoke appeared over the rooftops. A group of dwarves came running through the alleys. Dwarves of both sexes.
Two of them without hesitation jumped into the lake and started swimming splashing hard and moving for the centre of the lake. The rest scattered. Some turned towards the inn.
The mob poured into the street. They were faster than the dwarves. In their race was the lust for killing.
The cries of the victims drilled their ears ringing on the stained glass windows of the premises. Geralt noticed that his hands had begun to tremble.
One of the dwarves was literally torn to pieces. Another was thrown to the ground and in seconds became a shapeless bloody mass. A woman was massacred with pitchforks and spears. The child she was protecting was simply trampled crushed to death beneath their feet.
Three dwarves - a man and two women - ran towards the inn. The roaring crowd raced after them.
Geralt took a deep breath. He stood up. Feeling the terrified eyes of Dandelion and Wirsing he removed from the shelf above the fireplace Sihil the Mahakam sword forged in the foundry of Rhundurina itself.
Geralt… Dandelion moaned in a heartbreaking tone.
Very well said the witcher walking towards the exit. But this is the last time! Damn me but it really is the last time!
He went out onto the porch then jumped off it and cut a hulking man in a masonry smock then a woman that threatened him with a shovel. He then amputated the hand of a woman who was grasping the hair of one of the dwarves. With two quick diagonal cuts he finished off the men kicking one of the fallen dwarves.
He waded into the crowd. Quickly moving in semicircles. He slashed wide seemingly at random - knowing that such swings were more spectacular than violent. He did not want to kill them. He just wanted to wounded them.
An elf! An elf! Someone in the mob shouted as if possessed. Kill the elf!
What nonsense he thought Dandelion might look like an elf but I dont look like an elf in any way.
He spotted the person who had shouted maybe a soldier for he was wearing uniform and high boots. He advanced through the crowd dodging like an eel. The soldier was protecting himself with a pike holding it with both hands. Geralt chopped at the pole severing fingers.
He spun causing another large cut screams of pain and a fountain of blood.
Mercy! A lad said on his knees before him peering through his dishevelled hair. Mercy!
Geralt spared him stopping his arm and sword using the attacking impetus to complete his turn. From the corner of his eye he saw the dishevelled young man with a smirk on his face and saw what he was holding in his hands. He changed the direction of his movement trying to escape. But he was caught in the crowd. And for a split second he was mired in the crowd.
He could only watch the pitchfork that was flying towards his body.
The fire in the huge fireplace went out. A gust of wind from the mountains whistled through the crevices of the walls and screamed through the improperly closed shutters of Kaer Morhen Home of the Witchers.
Damn it! Eskel said standing up and going to the cupboard. Seagull or vodka?
Vodka Geralt and Coen said with one voice.
Sure interjected Vesemir hidden in the shadows Yes of course! Drown your stupidity in vodka. Damn fools!
It was an accident… muttered Lambert. She had already mastered the comb…
Shut your big mouth you idiot! I dont want to hear any more! I warned you if something happened to that little girl…
Enough Coen interrupted him softly. She sleeps peacefully. Deep and healthy. She will wake up a bit sore but thats it. About the trance and what happened she will not even remember it.
As long as you remember said Vesemir panting angrily. Cabbage heads! Pour for me too Eskel.
They were silent for a long time listening intently to the howling gale.
We will need to call someone Eskel finally said. We will need to bring a sorcerer here. What is happening to the girl it is not normal.
That is her third trance.
But the first time she has spoken clearly.
Repeat to me again what she said Vesemir said emptying his cup in one gulp. Word for word.
I cannot repeat it verbatim Geralt said staring into the embers. But the sense of it if you can make sense of it was as follows - Coen and I will die. The teeth will be our undoing. We will both be killed by teeth. He two. And me three.
It is quite likely snorted Lambert. That youll be killed from bites. Teeth can kill any of us at any time. But you two if that prophecy is truly prophetic will be finished off by some very jagged monsters.
Or festering gangrene because of bad teeth Eskel agreed apparently quite serious. But we are not missing any teeth.
I said Vesemir reprovingly would not take the matter lightly.
The witchers were silent. The wind howled through the walls of Kaer Morhen.
The dishevelled lad as if afraid of what he had done let go of the pitchfork. The witcher unable to repress a cry of pain bent forward stuck in his belly the pitchfork unbalanced him and he fell to his knees and slid onto the pavement. Blood spilled with a murmur and a splash worthy of a waterfall.
Geralt tried to stand. Instead he collapsed on his side.
The sounds that surrounded him acquired resonances and echoes heard as if underwater.
His eyes deceived him with impaired perspective and completely false geometry.
He saw the crowd disperse. They escaped from those who were coming to his aid. Zoltan and Yarpen with axes Wirsing with his butcher knife and Dandelion armed with a broom.
He wanted to scream where are you going? It is not worth pissing in the wind for me. But he could not scream. His voice was stifled by a wave of blood.
It was noon when the sorceresses arrived in Rivia within sight of the shiny surface of Loc Eskalott the towers of the castle and the red roofs of the city.
Were here said Yennefer. Rivia. What a curious and entangled destiny.
Ciri was excited and Kelpie kept dancing and shuffling on the edge of the road. Triss Merigold sighed unnoticed. Rather she believed it had been unnoticed.
Please Yennefer looked at her. What strange sounds float from your beauteous breast Triss. Ciri go out and see what lies ahead.
Triss averted her face determined not to give Yennefer any excuse. She did not expect it to work. For a long time she had been sensing Yennefers anger and aggression growing stronger as they approached Rivia.
You Triss Yennefer mischievously insisted do not blush do not sigh do not drool or wiggle around in your saddle. Or is it that you think because I agreed to your request that I want to have you with us? That I was interested in seeing you spend a meeting with an old love? Ciri I asked you to go on ahead. The two of us need to talk!
It is not a discussion it is a lecture. Ciri dared to argue but under the threatening glare from violet eyes she immediately recoiled clucked and galloped off on Kelpie on the road ahead.
Youre not going to meet a loved one Triss Yennefer continued. I am not so noble or stupid enough to give you the opportunity or him the temptation. But just for today. I could not deny myself the sweet satisfaction. He will know what role you play as a member of the Lodge. He will thank you for that with his famous look. And Ill be looking at your quivering lips and trembling hands I will listen to your lame apologies and excuses. And you know what Triss? I will faint with delight.
I knew Triss grunted. That you would not forget that you would take your revenge. I agreed to this because I was actually at fault. But one thing I must tell you Yennefer. Do not count too much on fainting. He knows how to forgive.
He knows what was done to him of course Yennefer narrowed her eyes. But he will never forgive you for what was done to Ciri. And me.
It is possible Triss swallowed. He may not forgive. Especially if you insist. But he wont fly into a rage. He wont lower himself like that.
Yennefer flicked her horse with her whip in anger. The animal whinnied and leapt and the sorceress swayed in her saddle.
Enough talk she snapped. More humility you smug viper! He is my man mine and only mine! Do you understand? You have to stop talking about him to stop thinking about him you have to stop admiring his noble character… As of right now right now! Oh I want to grab you by your matted red hair…
Try it! Screamed Triss. Just try it you vindictive bitch and Ill scratch out your eyes! I…
The both fell silent when they saw the cloud of dust as Ciri galloped back towards them.
They immediately understood that something was happening. Even before Ciri had reached them.
Above the thatched roofs and red tiles suddenly shot out red tongues of flame and belching clouds of smoke. To the sorceresses ears came a sound like the intrusive buzz of flies or the buzzing of angry bees. Screams grew stronger in counterpoint to the buzzing.
What the hell is going on? Yennefer stood in her stirrups. A raid? A fire?
Geralt… Ciri suddenly groaned turning as white as paper. Geralt!
Ciri? What is the matter?
Ciri raised her hand and the sorceresses saw blood running down her palm. Down the life line.
He has come full circle said the girl her eyes closed. He hurt me with the thorn from Shaerrawedd the snake Uroboros biting his own tail. Im coming Geralt! Im coming to you! I will not leave you alone!
Before the sorceresses were able to protest she turned Kelpie and immediately went into a full gallop.
They had enough presence of mind to immediately kick their horses into a gallop. But their mounts were not able to keep pace with Kelpie.
What is it? Shouted Yennefer cutting the wind. What is going on?
You know! Sobbed Triss galloping at her side. Ride Yennefer!
They had ridden between the citys outskirts before they passed their first fugitives fleeing from the city Yennefer was bright enough to know what was happening in Rivia no fire or raid of troops but a pogrom. She also knew what Ciri had sensed what -and whom - she was rushing to. She knew that she could not catch her. There was nothing she could do.
Frightened people had compacted into a crowd and she and Triss had to slow their mounts to try and get through. Kelpie just jumped the hooves of the horse knocking off a few hats and caps.
Ciri! Stop!
Before they knew it they were among the streets crowded with people running and screaming. Yennefer as she rode saw bodies lying in gutters and noticed bodies hanging by their legs from posts and beams. She saw a dwarf lying on the ground pounded by cudgels she saw another who had been massacred with broken bottlenecks. She heard tormentors shout and the screams of the tortured. She saw a woman thrown out of a window to the waiting crowd below and then beaten with sticks.
The crowd thickened the roar grew. It seemed that the distance between them and Ciri had decreased. The next obstacle was a group of halberdiers who tried to fence the black mare in before Kelpie jumped over them. One was knocked to the ground and the rest cowered in fright.
They rushed into a square which was covered in acrid smoke. Yennefer realised that Ciri undoubtedly guided by a prophetic vision was heading to the heat of the incident. Where the fires burned and murder was raging.
In the next street there was fighting dwarves and elves were fiercely defending themselves from behind a hastily erected barricade defending a helpless position falling and perishing under the pressure of the screaming mob that pounced on them. Ciri screamed and clung to the neck of her mare. Kelpie rose into the air and jumped over the barricade not like a horse but like a huge black bird.
Yennefer ran into the crowd but pulled her horse up short knocking over several people.
She was pulled from the saddle before she had time to scream. She was beaten on the shoulders on her back and neck. She fell to her knees and saw an unshaven man wearing a cobblers apron who was preparing to kick.
Yennefer had had enough of being kicked.
From her extended fingers shot a bolt of blue flame which whistled like a whip burning the face torso and arms of the people striking her. It started to smell of burning flesh and the screams of pain raised above the surrounding noise and din.
Witch! Elf sorceress!
Another man rushed at her brandishing an axe. Yennefer shot flames into his face his eyeballs boiled and them burst running down his cheeks with a hiss. She relaxed someone grabbed her by the arm and Yennefer pulled ready to shot but it was Triss.
Lets go… Yenna… Run!
Ive already heard that voice Yennefer thought. From those lips that look wooded without a droplet of saliva to wet them. from those lips that is paralysed with terror and shakes with panic. Ive already heard that voice. On the Hill at Sodden.
When I was dying in fear.
Now he is dying in fear. Until the end of my days Im going to be scared to death. Because those who do not break the cowardice will be scared to death until the end of their days.
The fingers that Triss dug into her arm were like steel Yennefer liberated herself from the grip with a great effort.
Run if you want! She shouted. Hide under the skirts of the Lodge! I have to nothing left to defend! I will not leave Ciri alone! Or Geralt! Begone! Get out of my way if you appreciate your skin!
The crowd keeping her away from her horse retreated before the rays given off by the hands and eyes of the sorceress. Yennefer shook her head ruffling her black curls. She seem to be fury incarnate the avenging angel with her flaming sword.
Return home scum! She cried leaping at the crowd with a fiery whip. Run! Otherwise catch fire like cattle!
Its just one witch people! A sonorous voice rang from the crowd. One cursed elf witch!
Shes alone! The other has fled! Hey bring us the stones!
Death to non-humans! Death to witches!
To the gallows with her!
The first stone whizzed past her ear. The second hit her in the shoulder and rocked her back. The third struck her in the face. Pain exploded behind her eyes then everything was wrapped in black velvet.
She came to and groaned in pain. Both of her forearms and wrists ached like crazy. She mechanically fumbled around and noticed several layers of bandages. She groaned again without words desperate. With regret that this was not a dream. And regretting to have not succeeded.
It did not work Tissaia de Vries said sitting next to the bed.
Yennefer wanted a drink something to wet her sticky lips. But she did not ask. Her pride would not allow it.
It did not work said Tissaia de Vries. But not because you did not try. You cut yourself deeply and accurately. Therefore I am now with you. If you did not mean it seriously if it was just a ridiculous bogus exhibition I have only contempt for you. But you cut yourself deep. Seriously.
Yennefer numbly stared at the ceiling.
I will take care of you girl. I think you are worth it. Ill work with you here. It will not be easy. I have to straighten the spine and flatten the hump. But I also have to treat those hands. When you cut your veins you severed tendons. And the hands of a sorceress are a very important instrument Yennefer.
Moisture on her lips. Water.
Youll live said Tissaia factually seriously even severe. Your time is yet to come. But when it arrives youll remember this day.
Yennefer eagerly sucked moisture from a stick wrapped in a wet dressing.
Ill take care of you echoed Tissaia de Vries touching her hair gently. And now… Were here alone without witnesses. Not one is looking at us and Im not going to say anything to anyone. Cry girl. Pour it all out. Make it your last cry. Starting now you will never cry. There is nothing more pathetic than a sorceress in tears.
She came to coughing and spitting blood. Someone had dragged her across the ground it was Triss she was met by the smell of her perfume. Close to them on the pavement shod hooves rang with a vibrating clang. Yennefer saw a rider in full armour with a white shield with a red chevron from the height of his saddle he was whipping the crowd. Stones hurled by the mob bounced harmlessly off on the armour and helmet. The horse neighed and kicked out.
Yennefer felt that instead of an upper lip she had a big potato. At least one front tooth was chipped or knocked out and it hurt to talk.
Triss… She stammered. Teleport us out of here!
No Yennefer Trisss voice was very quiet and very cold.
Theyll kill us…
No Yennefer. I will not run away. I will not hide under the skirts of the Lodge. And even though it I am ready to faint with fear like at Sodden I will get over it!
Near the entrance of the alley on the ledge of a wall covered with moss had formed a large pile of manure debris and trash. It was a colossal heap. A splendid hill.
The crowd had finally managed to knock the knight from his horse. He was dragged to the ground with a terrible crash and the mob crawled over him like lice.
Triss grabbed Yennefer and dragged her towards the pile of rubbish and raised her hands.
She shouted a spell with such rage that the crowd fell silent for a moment.
They will kill us Yennefer spat blood.
Help me Yennefer Triss stopped for a moment. Help me. Lets cast Alzurs Thunder…
That will kill five thought Yennefer. Then the rest will tear us apart. But okay Triss. I will not run away. You will not see me run.
She joined in the enchantment. And they shouted in duet.
The people stared at them blankly staring but quickly recovered. They again began throwing stones at the sorceresses. Triss felt one whizz pass her head but did not flinch.
It wont work thought Yennefer. The spell will not work. We cannot conjure up something as complicated as Alzurs Thunder. It was said that Alzur had a voice like a bell and superior diction. And we are babbling and crying the words and melody…
She was ready to stop the chant and use her remaining strength to concentrate on some other spell something to teleport them or to distract the charging mob - if only for a second - with something unpleasant. But it turned out it was not necessary.
The sky darkened suddenly with clouds over the city. The shadows spread quickly. And a cold wind rose.
Oh said Yennefer. It seems that you did it…
Merigolds Hailstorm said Nimue. Basically the name is used illegally since the magic has never been registered and no one has been able to repeat it. The reason is simple - Triss had an injured mouth and spoke slurred and distortedly. Some also claim that fear affected her language.
I do not believe it Condwiramurs pursed her lips. In the annals there is no shortage of other examples of courage and heroism from Venerable Triss some even call her chronically fearless. But I wanted to ask you about something else. One version of the legend has it that Triss was not alone on Rivia Hill. That Yennefer was also there with her.
Nimue looked at the watercolour depicting a black mountain steep and sharp as a knife against dark blue clouds. At the top of the hill could be seen a slender silhouette of a woman with outstretched arms and red hair.
Through the fog that covered the surface of the water came the rhythmic clatter of the Fisher Kings oars.
If anyone was there with Triss said the Lady of the Lake they did not survive the vision of the artist.
It seems that you did it said Yennefer. Watch out Triss!
From the black clouds over the city of Rivia fell a barrage of icy hailstones the size of hens eggs. They beat down so hard they broke rooftops. They fell so densely that they covered the streets and squares in a thick layer of ice. The crowd swayed people fell covering their heads hiding under one another and fleeing and falling on the slippery ground rolling about and crowding the archways under ledges. Not everyone managed to escape some remained lying on the ice like dead fish which was heavily dyed with blood.
Hail rattled on the magical shield that Yennefer was able to throw up at the last minute above both sorceresses and threatened to break through. She did not try any other spells. She knew what had been done could not be stopped an elemental force had been accidentally unleashed and had to reach its climax. Which it would soon reach.
That was the hope at least.
Lightning flashed and thunder boomed until the surrounding houses were shaken to their foundation. All beat all around with a devastating effect. The sky began to brighten. From a cleft in the clouds appeared sunlight. Triss made a strange cry or sob from her throat.
Hail sparkled in the sun like diamonds. They were still falling but the biggest downpour had abated Yennefer could tell by the pounding on the magical shield then the hail stopped.
Suddenly as if cut off. Guards stormed into the street the shoes of their horses scraped on the ice. The rabble screamed and fled driven by whips and beaten with the flats of swords.
Bravo Triss croaked Yennefer. I dont know what that was… But it was effective.
There was something to defend croaked Triss Merigold - heroine of the hill.
There always is. We better run Triss. Because it is probably not over yet.
That was the end. The sorceresses hail that they had launched at the city had cooled the hot heads. So much so that the army dared to intervene and restore order. Until then the soldiers had been afraid. They knew what they were threatened with in case of an attack by the feverish crowd with a thirst for death and who fears nothing. However the explosion of the elements tamed the many-headed beast and the army charged and did the rest.
The hail was a terrible disaster for the city. And so men who had moments ago tried to kill a dwarf by smashing his head against a wall now sobbing looked at what remained of his house.
In Rivia all was quiet. If it had not been for the two hundred massacred corpses and some burning houses you might have thought that nothing had happened.
In the Elms district next to Loc Eskalott over which burned a rainbow in the sky and the weeping willows reflected in the clear mirror of the water the birds sang again and the grass smelled wet. Everything looked idyllic.
Even the witcher who lay in a pool of blood in which Ciri knelt.
Geralt lay senseless white as chalk. He lay motionless but when they reached him he began to cough and to spit blood. He began to shake and to tremble so violently that Ciri could not hold him. Yennefer knelt beside him. Triss saw her hands shaking. Suddenly she felt very weak and her vision blurred. Someone grabbed her preventing her from falling on the ground. She recognised Dandelion.
It wont work said Ciris voice radiating despair. Your magic cannot cure him Yennefer.
We arrived… Yennefer could barely move her lips. Were too late.
Your magic wont work Ciri repeated as if she had not heard. Is this what it is worth all of your magic?
Youre right Ciri Triss thought feeling something catch in her throat. We can produce hail but we cannot ward off death. Although apparently the latter is easier.
We sent for a physician said a dwarf standing next to Dandelion in a husky voice but he has not appeared…
It is too late for a doctor Triss said surprising herself that her voice sounded so calm. He is dying.
Geralt continued to stir coughing blood then becoming very tense and froze. Dandelion still holding Triss sighed in despair the dwarf cursed. Yennefer moaned her face changing suddenly contracted and ugly.
There is nothing more pathetic said Ciri sternly than a sorceress in tears. You taught me that. But now youre pathetic Yennefer. You and your magic which is useless.
Yennefer did not reply. She could barely hold Geralts head in both of her hands while repeating a spell. In her hands the witchers cheeks and forehead crackled with blue sparks.
Triss knew how much energy was required for that spell. She also knew that the spell would not help. She was even more confident that the spell would prove powerless for someone who was sterile. It was too late. The spell only exhausted Yennefer. Triss was surprised that the black-haired sorceress was able to withstand for so long.
Then she ceased to be surprised because Yennefer stopped in the middle of the magic formula and fell on the pavement next to the witcher.
One of the dwarves swore again the other bowed his head in silence. Triss Merigold still being propped up sniffed loudly.
Suddenly it got very cold. The surface of the lake boiled like a witchs cauldron and was enveloped in mist. The fog grew rapidly it swirled over the water and stood on the waves covering them in a think white milk that stifled and sounds and made shapes and figures vanish.
I Ciri said slowly still kneeling on the bloody ground I once gave up my power. If I didnt I could save him now. I could cure him. I know it. But it is too late I cant do anything. It is like I killed him myself.
The silence was broken by Kelpies whinny. Then by Dandelions muffled gasp.
They were all stunned.
A white unicorn appeared out of the mist running light agile and silent lifting his beautiful head. This was not just anything unusual they all knew the legend and the passage about the fact that unicorns run light agile and silently. What was strange was that the unicorn was running on the surface of the lake and did not even wrinkle the water.
Dandelion gasped this time in awe. Triss felt overwhelmed by her emotions. Euphoria.
The unicorns hooves rang on the stones of the waterfront. He shook his mane and horn and melodically neighed.
Ihuarraquax Ciri spoke to him. I was hoping youd come.
The unicorn came closer neighing again and digging his hooves into the hard cobblestones. He lowered his head the horn which sprang from his head suddenly blazed with light with a sheen that dispelled the fog.
Ciri touched the horn.
Triss gasped loudly when she saw the girls eyes filled with white heat and her head enveloped in a halo. Ciri did not hear her did not hear anyone. With one hand she touched the unicorns horn with the other she touched the witcher. From her fingers drifted a ribbon of flickering light.
No one could say how long it lasted. It was unreal.
Like a dream.
The unicorn snorted pawed at the ground several times and moved his head as if pointing at something. Triss looked. Under a canopy of overhanging willow branches she could discern a dark outline in the mist. A boat sailing on the water.
The unicorn once more shook its horn and began to disappear in the white fog.
Kelpie Ciri said. Go with him.
Kelpie snorted. She shook her head. Then obediently walked behind the unicorn. Her shoes made an echoing sound on the cobblestones. Then the sound abruptly stopped as if the mare had taken flight disappeared or dematerialised.
The boat was on the shore a few moments after the fog dissolved Triss saw it clearly. It was a tatty old barge formless as a trough in a barn.
Help me Ciri said firmly and decisively.
At first no one knew what the girl wanted help with. The poet was the first to understand. Perhaps because he knew the legend that he frequently lectured on and sang its verses. In his arms he picked up Yennefer. He marvelled at how small and light she was. He would have sworn that someone helped him lift her. He would have sworn that he felt Cahirs arms helping. That he caught a glimpse of Milvas braid. He would have sworn that when he took the sorceress to the boat he saw Angoulêmes little hand holding it steady.
The dwarves picked up the witcher Triss helped them holding his head. Yarpen Zigrin blinked for a second because he saw the two Dahlberg brothers. Zoltan Chivay would have sworn that Caleb Stratton helped him lift the witcher into the boat. Triss Merigold was sure that she could smell the perfume of Lytta Neyd called Coral and in a haze of yellow-green her eyes saw Coen of Kaer Morhen.
These tricks were brought to their minds by the dense fog around Loc Eskalott.
Ready Ciri the sorceress said dully. Your boat is waiting.
Ciri brushed the hair from her forehead and sniffed.
Apologise to the ladies at Montecalvo Triss she said. But it can be no other way. I cannot stay if Geralt and Yennefer leave. I simply cannot. They must understand.
They must.
Goodbye Triss Merigold. Take care Dandelion. Take care all.
Ciri Triss whispered. Little sister… Let me sail with you…
You do not know what you ask Triss.
Will I ever see you…
Definitely she interrupted.
She climbed aboard the boat which rocked and immediately began to move away from the shore. It disappeared into the fog. Those on the shore did not hear the slightest splash and there was no movement in the water. It was as if it had disappeared like a ghost.
For a brief moment they saw the small silhouette of Ciri they saw her sitting at the bottom of the boat as it accelerated swiftly.
And then there was only fog.
She lied thought Triss. I will never see her again. I wont see her because… Vaesse deireadh aep eigean. Something ends.
Something ends said Dandelion.
Something begins Yarpen Zigrin finished.
From somewhere on the other side of the lake a cock crowed loudly.
The fog began to rapidly lift.
Geralt opened his eyes irritated by the play of light and shadow through his closed eyelids. He saw above him leaves a kaleidoscope of leaves glistening in the sun. He also saw branches full of apples.
He felt the delicate touch of fingers on his temple and his cheek. Fingers he knew. He loved her so much that it hurt. His stomach chest and ribs ached and a corset of tight bandages convinced him completely that the pitchfork in the city of Rivia had not been a nightmare.
Lay quietly my love said Yennefer. Lay quietly. Do not move.
Where are we Yen?
Does it matter? We are together. You and me.
The birds sang. It smelled of herbs rosemary flowers and apples.
Where is Ciri?
She is gone.
She shifted and gently freed her arm from under his head and lay beside him on the grass so that she could look into his eyes. She looked eagerly as if she would memorise his image as if to save it for the future for all eternity. He also looked at her as nostalgia gripped his throat.
We were in a boat with Ciri Geralt recalled. On a lake. Then on a river with a strong current. Among the fog.
He fingers found his hand and squeezed hard.
Lay still my love. Lay still. Im with you. It does not matter what happened it does not matter where we were. Now Im with you. I will never leave you. Never.
I love you Yen.
I know.
Nevertheless he sighed. Id like to know where we are.
Me too Yennefer said quietly after a while.
And that Galahad asked is the end of the story?
Certainly not said Ciri rubbing one foot against the other trying to get rid of the sand sticking to her feet. You want it to end? I do not!
So what happened next?
The normal she snorted. They got married.
Tell me.
Whats to tell? They celebrate with a big wedding. They invited everyone - Dandelion Mother Nenneke Iola and Eurneid Yarpen Zigrin Vesemir Eskel… Coen Milva Angoulême… And Mistle. I was there too and we were drinking wine and mead. And they Yennefer and Geralt built a house and they live there happily ever after. Like in a fairytale. Do you understand?
Why are you crying Lady of the Lake?
Im not crying the tears in my eyes are from the wind!
There was a long silence and they watched the sun go down over the mountain peaks.
Upon my soul Galahad said after a while. It was a unheard of story. Strange is the world from which you came Lady Ciri.
She sniffed loudly.
Yes continued Galahad clearing his throat a few times somewhat depressed by the silence. But here in our lands adventure occurs worthy of wonder. Take for example what happen with Lord Gawain and the Green Knight… Or my uncle Bors and Tristan… Listen then Lady Ciri. Lord Bors and Lord Tristan were riding to the west towards Tintagel. Their path led them through a wild and threatening forest. They continued to ride and keep a careful watch. Then there appeared a white deer and next to it a lady dressed all in black as black as anything you have seen in your nightmares. And that lady was beautiful more beautiful than any lady in the world well not Lady Guinevere… The knights saw the lady standing next to the deer and waved and she told them this…
Galahad.
Yes?
Be quiet.
He coughed and fell silent. Both were silent staring at the sun. They stayed that way for a long time.
Lady of the Lake?
I asked you not to call me that.
Lady Ciri?
Go ahead.
Come with me to Camelot Lady Ciri. You have to meet King Arthur he will show you honour and reverence… I will… I will always love and worship…
Get up! Or not. While you are kneeling you can rub my feet. They are hurting me terribly. Thank you. You are very kind. I said my feet! Feet end at the ankles.
Lady Ciri?
Im still here.
The sun is about to set…
Thats the truth Ciri bent down and buckled her shoes then stood up. Well saddle the horses Galahad. Is there somewhere around here where we can spend the night? Ha! From your look I can see you know this land about as well as me. But no matter let us set out whether to sleep in the open or in the woods. Lets not let twilight catch us near the lake. The night will be very cold here… What are you looking at?
Oh she said seeing the young man blush. Youre smiling at the thought of spending the night in a carpet of moss bed under a hazel bush? In the arms of a fairy? Listen well young man I do not have the slightest desire…
She paused looking at his blush and sparkling eyes. Seeing something there in his face which was not really ugly. Something squeezed her stomach and gut and it was not hunger.
Something is happening to me she though. Whats wrong with me?
Do not bother! She almost cried. Lets saddle the horses!
When they were in the saddle she looked at him and laughed out loud. He looked at her his eyes filled with amazement and questions.
Nothing nothing she said easily. It was just something I was thinking. Lead the way Galahad.
Carpet of moss she thought holding back a chuckle. A hazel bush. And me in the role of a fairy. Well well.
Lady Ciri…
What?
Will you come with me to Camelot?
She held out her hand. He held out his hand. Holding hands they rode side by side.
The devil she thought why not? I bet any money that this world has jobs for a witcheress.
Lady Ciri?
Lets not talk about it now. Lets ride.
They rode off towards the sunset. Behind them they left a darkening valley. Behind them was a lake an enchanted lake a lake blue and smooth as a polished sapphire. Behind them were left the boulders littering the shore. And pine trees on the slope.
That was left behind them.
And everything else was in front of them.
Sword of Destiny
He wont get out of there Im telling you the pockmarked man said shaking his head with conviction. Its been an hour and a quarter since he went down. Thats the end of im.
The townspeople crammed among the ruins stared in silence at the black hole gaping in the debris at the rubble-strewn opening. A fat man in a yellow jerkin shifted from one foot to the other cleared his throat and took off his crumpled biretta.
Lets wait a little longer he said wiping the sweat from his thinning eyebrows.
For what? the spotty-faced man snarled. Have you forgotten Alderman that a basilisk is lurking in that there dungeon? No one who goes in there comes out. Havent enough people perished? Why wait?
But we struck a deal the fat man muttered hesitantly. This just isnt right.
We made a deal with a living man Alderman said the spotty-faced mans companion a giant in a leather butchers apron. And now hes dead sure as eggs is eggs. It was plain from the start he was heading to his doom just like the others. Why he even went in without a looking glass taking only a sword. And you cant kill a basilisk without a looking glass everyone knows that.
Youve saved yourself a shilling Alderman the spotty-faced man added. For theres no one to pay for the basilisk. So get off home nice and easy. And well take the sorcerers horse and chattels. Shame to let goods go to waste.
Aye the butcher said. A sturdy mare and saddlebags nicely stuffed. Lets take a peek at whats inside.
This isnt right. What are you doing?
Quiet Alderman and stay out of this or youre in for a hiding the spotty-faced man warned.
Sturdy mare the butcher repeated.
Leave that horse alone comrade.
The butcher turned slowly towards the newcomer who had appeared from a recess in the wall and the people gathered around the entrance to the dungeon.
The stranger had thick curly chestnut hair. He was wearing a dark brown tunic over a padded coat and high riding boots. And he was not carrying a weapon.
Move away from the horse he repeated smiling venomously. What is this? Another mans horse saddlebags and property and you cant take your watery little eyes off them cant wait to get your scabby mitts on them? Is that fitting behaviour?
The spotty-faced man slowly sliding a hand under his coat glanced at the butcher. The butcher nodded and beckoned towards a part of the crowd from which stepped two stocky men with close-cropped hair. They were holding clubs of the kind used to stun animals in a slaughterhouse.
Who are you the spotty-faced man asked still holding his hand inside his coat to tell us what is right and what is not?
That is not your concern comrade.
You carry no weapon.
Tis true. The stranger smiled even more venomously. I do not.
Thats too bad. The spotty-faced man removed his hand–and with it a long knife–from inside his coat. It is very unfortunate that you do not.
The butcher also drew a knife as long as a cutlass. The other two men stepped forward raising their clubs.
I have no need the stranger said remaining where he stood. My weapons follow me.
Two young women came out from behind the ruins treading with soft sure steps. The crowd immediately parted then stepped back and thinned out.
The two women grinned flashing their teeth and narrowing their eyes from whose corners broad tattooed stripes ran towards their ears. The muscles of their powerful thighs were visible beneath lynx skins wrapped around their hips and on their sinuous arms naked above their mail gloves. Sabre hilts stuck up behind their shoulders which were also protected by chainmail.
Slowly very slowly the spotty-faced man bent his knees and dropped his knife on the ground.
A rattle of stones and a scraping sound echoed from the hole in the rubble and then two hands clinging to the jagged edge of the wall emerged from the darkness. After the hands then appeared in turn a head of white hair streaked with brick dust a pale face and a sword hilt projecting above the shoulders. The crowd murmured.
The white-haired man reached down to haul a grotesque shape from the hole; a bizarre bulk smeared in blood-soaked dust. Holding the creature by its long reptilian tail he threw it without a word at the fat Aldermans feet. He sprang back tripping against a collapsed fragment of wall and looked at the curved birdlike beak webbed wings and the hooked talons on the scaly feet. At the swollen dewlap once crimson now a dirty russet. And at the glazed sunken eyes.
Theres your basilisk the white-haired man said brushing the dust from his trousers as agreed. Now my two hundred lintars if you please. Honest lintars not too clipped. Ill check them you can count on it.
The Alderman drew out a pouch with trembling hands. The white-haired man looked around and then fixed his gaze for a moment on the spotty-faced man and the knife lying by his foot. He looked at the man in the dark brown tunic and at the young women in the lynx skins.
As usual he said taking the pouch from the Aldermans trembling hands I risk my neck for you for a paltry sum and in the meantime you go after my things. You never change; a pox on the lot of you.
Havent been touched the butcher muttered moving back. The men with the clubs had melted into the crowd long before. Your things havent been touched sir.
That pleases me greatly the white-haired man smiled. At the sight of the smile burgeoning on his pale face like a wound bursting the small crowd began to quickly disperse. And for that reason friend you shall also remain untouched. Go in peace. But make haste.
The spotty-faced man was also retreating. The spots on his white face were unpleasantly conspicuous.
Hey stop there the man in the dark brown tunic said to him. Youve forgotten something.
What is that… sir?
You drew a knife on me.
The taller of the women suddenly swayed legs planted widely apart and twisted her hips. Her sabre which no one saw her draw hissed sharply through the air. The spotty-faced mans head flew upwards in an arc and fell into the gaping opening to the dungeon. His body toppled stiffly and heavily like a tree being felled among the crushed bricks. The crowd let out a scream. The second woman hand on her sword hilt whirled around nimbly protecting her partners back. Needlessly. The crowd stumbling and falling over on the rubble fled towards the town as fast as they could. The Alderman loped at the front with impressive strides outdistancing the huge butcher by only a few yards.
An excellent stroke the white-haired man commented coldly shielding his eyes from the sun with a black-gloved hand. An excellent stroke from a Zerrikanian sabre. I bow before the skill and beauty of the free warriors. Im Geralt of Rivia.
And I the stranger in the dark brown tunic pointed at the faded coat of arms on the front of his garment depicting three black birds sitting in a row in the centre of a uniformly gold field am Borch also known as Three Jackdaws. And these are my girls Téa and Véa. Thats what I call them because youll twist your tongue on their right names. They are both as you correctly surmised Zerrikanian.
Thanks to them it appears I still have my horse and belongings. I thank you warriors. My thanks to you too sir.
Three Jackdaws. And you can drop the sir. Does anything detain you in this little town Geralt of Rivia?
Quite the opposite.
Excellent. I have a proposal. Not far from here at the crossroads on the road to the river port is an inn. Its called the Pensive Dragon. The vittals there have no equal in these parts. Im heading there with food and lodging in mind. It would be my honour should you choose to keep me company.
Borch. The white-haired man turned around from his horse and looked into the strangers bright eyes. I wouldnt want anything left unclear between us. Im a witcher.
I guessed as much. But you said it as you might have said Im a leper.
There are those Geralt said slowly who prefer the company of lepers to that of a witcher.
There are also those Three Jackdaws laughed who prefer sheep to girls. Ah well one can only sympathise with the former and the latter. I repeat my proposal.
Geralt took off his glove and shook the hand being proffered.
I accept glad to have made your acquaintance.
Then let us go for I hunger.
The innkeeper wiped the rough table top with a cloth bowed and smiled. Two of his front teeth were missing.
Right then… Three Jackdaws looked up for a while at the blackened ceiling and the spiders dancing about beneath it.
First… First beer. To save your legs an entire keg. And to go with the beer… What do you propose with the beer comrade?
Cheese? risked the innkeeper.
No Borch grimaced. Well have cheese for dessert. We want something sour and spicy with the beer.
At your service the innkeeper smiled even more broadly. His two front teeth were not the only ones he lacked. Elvers with garlic in olive oil and green pepper pods in vinegar or marinated…
Very well. Well take both. And then that soup I once ate here with diverse molluscs little fish and other tasty morsels floating in it.
Log drivers soup?
The very same. And then roast lamb with onions. And then three-score crayfish. Throw as much dill into the pot as you can. After that sheeps cheese and lettuce. And then well see.
At your service. Is that for everyone? I mean four times?
The taller Zerrikanian shook her head patting herself knowingly on her waist which was now hugged by a tight linen blouse.
I forgot. Three Jackdaws winked at Geralt. The girls are watching their figures. Lamb just for the two of us innkeeper. Serve the beer right now with those elvers. No wait a while so they dont go cold. We didnt come here to stuff ourselves but simply to spend some time in conversation.
Very good. The innkeeper bowed once more.
Prudence is a matter of import in your profession. Give me your hand comrade.
Gold coins jingled. The innkeeper opened his gap-toothed mouth to the limit.
That is not an advance Three Jackdaws announced it is a bonus. And now hurry off to the kitchen good fellow.
It was warm in the snug. Geralt unbuckled his belt took off his tunic and rolled up his shirtsleeves.
I see he said that you arent troubled by a shortage of funds. Do you live on the privileges of a knightly estate?
Partially Three Jackdaws smiled without offering further details.
They dealt quickly with the elvers and a quarter of the keg. Neither of the two Zerrikanians stinted on the beer and soon were both in visible good humour. They were whispering something to each other. Véa the taller one suddenly burst out in throaty laughter.
Are the warriors versed in the Common Speech? Geralt asked quietly sneaking a sideways glance at them.
Poorly. And they are not garrulous. For which they deserve credit. How do you find the soup Geralt?
Mmm.
Let us drink.
Mmm.
Geralt Three Jackdaws began putting aside his spoon and hiccoughing in a dignified manner I wish to return for a moment to the conversation we had on the road. I understand that you a witcher wander from one end of the world to the other and should you come across a monster along the way you kill it. And you earn money doing that. Does that describe the witchers trade?
More or less.
And does it ever happen that someone specifically summons you somewhere? On a special commission lets say. Then what? You go and carry it out?
That depends on who asks me and why.
And for how much?
That too the Witcher shrugged. Prices are going up and one has to live as a sorceress acquaintance of mine used to say.
Quite a selective approach; very practical Id say. But at the root of it lies some idea Geralt. The conflict between the forces of Order and the forces of Chaos as a sorcerer acquaintance of mine used to say. I imagine that you carry out your mission defending people from Evil always and everywhere. Without distinction. You stand on a clearly defined side of the palisade.
The forces of Order the forces of Chaos. Awfully high-flown words Borch. You desperately want to position me on one side of the palisade in a conflict which is generally thought to be perennial began long before us and will endure long after weve gone. On which side does the farrier shoeing horses stand? Or our innkeeper hurrying here with a cauldron of lamb? What in your opinion defines the border between Chaos and Order?
A very simple thing said Three Jackdaws and looked him straight in the eye. That which represents Chaos is menace is the aggressive side. While Order is the side being threatened in need of protection. In need of a defender. But let us drink. And make a start on the lamb.
Rightly said.
The Zerrikanians watching their figures were taking a break from eating time they spent drinking more quickly. Véa leaning over on her companions shoulder whispered something again brushing the table top with her plait. Téa the shorter of the two laughed loudly cheerfully narrowing her tattooed eyelids.
Yes Borch said picking a bone clean. Let us continue our talk if you will. I understand you arent keen on being placed on either side. You do your job.
Thats correct.
But you cannot escape the conflict between Chaos and Order. Although it was your comparison you are not a farrier. Ive seen you work. You go down into a dungeon among some ruins and come out with a slaughtered basilisk. There is comrade a difference between shoeing horses and killing basilisks. You said that if the payment is fair youll hurry to the end of the world and dispatch the monster youre asked to. Lets say a fierce dragon is wreaking havoc on a—
Bad example Geralt interrupted. You see right away youve mixed up Chaos and Order. Because I do not kill dragons; and they without doubt represent Chaos.
How so? Three Jackdaws licked his fingers. Well I never! After all among all monsters dragons are probably the most bestial the cruellest and fiercest. The most revolting of reptiles. They attack people breathe fire and carry off you know virgins. Theres no shortage of tales like that. It cant be that you a witcher dont have a few dragons on your trophy list.
I dont hunt dragons Geralt said dryly. I hunt forktails for sure. And dracolizards. And flying drakes. But not true dragons; the green the black or the red. Take note please.
You astonish me Three Jackdaws said. Very well Ive taken note. In any case thats enough about dragons for the moment I see something red on the horizon and it is surely our crayfish. Let us drink!
Their teeth crunched through the red shells and they sucked out the white flesh. The salt water stinging painfully trickled down over their wrists. Borch poured the beer by now scraping the ladle across the bottom of the keg. The Zerrikanians were even more cheerful the two of them looking around the inn and smiling ominously. The Witcher was convinced they were searching out an opportunity for a brawl. Three Jackdaws must also have noticed because he suddenly shook a crayfish he was holding by the tail at them. The women giggled and Téa pouted her lips for a kiss and winked. Combined with her tattooed face this made for a gruesome sight.
They are as savage as wildcats Three Jackdaws murmured to Geralt. They need watching. With them comrade suddenly–before you know it–the floors covered in guts. But theyre worth every penny. If you knew what theyre capable of…
I know Geralt nodded. You couldnt find a better escort. Zerrikanians are born warriors trained to fight from childhood.
I didnt mean that. Borch spat a crayfish claw onto the table. I meant what theyre like in bed.
Geralt glanced anxiously at the women. They both smiled. Véa reached for the dish with a swift almost imperceptible movement. Looking at the Witcher through narrowed eyes she bit open a shell with a crack. Her lips glistened with the salt water. Three Jackdaws belched loudly.
And so Geralt he said. You dont hunt dragons; neither green nor any other colour. Ive made a note of it. And why may I ask only those three colours?
Four to be precise.
You mentioned three.
Dragons interest you Borch. For any particular reason?
No. Pure curiosity.
Aha. Well about those colours: its customary to define true dragons like that although they are not precise terms. Green dragons the most common are actually greyish like ordinary dracolizards. Red dragons are in fact reddish or brick-red. Its customary to call the large dark brown ones black. White dragons are the rarest. Ive never seen one. They occur in the distant North. Reputedly.
Interesting. And do you know what other dragons Ive also heard about?
I do Geralt sipped his beer. The same ones Ive heard about. Golden dragons. There are no such creatures.
On what grounds do you claim that? Because youve never seen one? Apparently you havent seen a white one either.
Thats not the point. Beyond the seas in Ofir and Zangvebar there are white horses with black stripes. I havent seen them but I know they exist. But golden dragons are mythical creatures. Fabled. Like the phoenix lets say. There are no phoenixes or golden dragons.
Véa leaning on her elbows looked at him curiously.
You must know what youre talking about youre a witcher Borch ladled beer from the keg but I think that every myth every fable must have some roots. Something lies among those roots.
It does Geralt confirmed. Most often a dream a wish a desire a yearning. Faith that there are no limits to possibility. And occasionally chance.
Precisely chance. Perhaps there once was a golden dragon an accidental unique mutation?
If there were it met the fate of all mutants. The Witcher turned his head away. It differed too much to endure.
Ha Three Jackdaws said now you are denying the laws of nature Geralt. My sorcerer acquaintance was wont to say that every being has its own continuation in nature and survives in some way or another. The end of one is the beginning of another there are no limits to possibility; or at least nature doesnt know any.
Your sorcerer acquaintance was a great optimist. But he failed to take one thing into consideration: a mistake committed by nature. Or by those who trifle with it. Golden dragons and other similar mutants were they to exist couldnt survive. For a very natural limit of possibilities prevents it.
What limit is that?
Mutants the muscles in Geralts jaw twitched violently mutants are sterile Borch. Only in fables survives what cannot survive in nature. Only myths and fables do not know the limits of possibility.
Three Jackdaws said nothing. Geralt looked at the Zerrikanians at their faces suddenly grown serious. Véa unexpectedly leant over towards him and put a hard muscular arm around his neck. He felt her lips wet from beer on his cheek.
They like you Three Jackdaws said slowly. Well Ill be damned they like you.
Whats strange about that? the Witcher smiled sadly.
Nothing. But we must drink to it. Innkeeper. Another keg!
Take it easy. A pitcher at most.
Two pitchers! Three Jackdaws yelled. Téa I have to go out for a while.
The Zerrikanian stood up took her sabre from the bench and swept the room with a wistful gaze. Although previously as the Witcher had observed several pairs of eyes had lit up greedily at the sight of Borchs bulging purse no one seemed in a hurry to go after him as he staggered slightly towards the door to the courtyard. Téa shrugged following her employer.
What is your real name? Geralt asked the one who had remained at the table. Véa flashed her white teeth. Her blouse was very loosely laced almost to the limits of possibility. The Witcher had no doubt it was intentionally provocative.
Alvéaenerle.
Pretty. The Witcher was sure the Zerrikanian would purse her lips and wink at him. He was not mistaken.
Véa?
Mm?
Why do you ride with Borch? You free warriors? Would you mind telling me?
Mm.
Mm what?
He is… the Zerrikanian frowning searched for the words. He is… the most… beautiful.
The Witcher nodded. Not for the first time the criteria by which women judged the attractiveness of men remained a mystery to him.
Three Jackdaws lurched back into the snug fastening his trousers and issued loud instructions to the innkeeper. Téa walking two steps behind him feigning boredom looked around the inn and the merchants and log drivers carefully avoided her gaze. Véa was sucking the contents from another crayfish and continually throwing the Witcher meaningful glances.
Ive ordered us an eel each baked this time Three Jackdaws sat down heavily his unfastened belt clinking. I struggled with those crayfish and seem to have worked up an appetite. And Ive organised a bed for you Geralt. Theres no sense in you roaming around tonight. We can still amuse ourselves. Heres to you girls!
Vessekheal Véa said saluting him with her beaker. Téa winked and stretched; and her bosom contrary to Geralts expectations did not split the front of her blouse.
Lets make merry! Three Jackdaws leant across the table and slapped Téa on the backside. Lets make merry Witcher. Hey landlord! Over here!
The innkeeper scuttled briskly over wiping his hands on his apron.
Could you lay your hands on a tub? The kind you launder clothes in sturdy and large?
How large sir?
For four people.
For… four… the innkeeper opened his mouth.
For four Three Jackdaws confirmed drawing a full purse from his pocket.
I could. The innkeeper licked his lips.
Splendid Borch laughed. Have it carried upstairs to my room and filled with hot water. With all speed comrade. And have beer brought there too. Three pitchers.
The Zerrikanians giggled and winked at the same time.
Which one do you prefer? Three Jackdaws asked. Eh? Geralt?
The Witcher scratched the back of his head.
I know its difficult to choose said Three Jackdaws understandingly. I occasionally have difficulty myself. Never mind well give it some thought in the tub. Hey girls. Help me up the stairs!
There was a barrier on the bridge. The way was barred by a long solid beam set on wooden trestles. In front and behind it stood halberdiers in studded leather coats and mail hoods. A purple banner bearing the emblem of a silver gryphon fluttered lazily above the barrier.
What the devil? Three Jackdaws said in surprise approaching at a walk. Is there no way through?
Got a safe-conduct? the nearest halberdier asked without taking the stick he was chewing either from hunger or to kill time from his mouth.
Safe-conduct? What is it the plague? Or war perhaps? On whose orders do you obstruct the way?
Those of King Niedamir Lord of Caingorn the guardsman replied shifting the stick to the other side of his mouth and pointing at the banner. Without a safe-conduct you cant go up.
Some sort of idiocy Geralt said in a tired voice. This isnt Caingorn but Barefields territory. Barefield not Caingorn levies tolls from the bridges on the Braa. What has Niedamir to do with it?
Dont ask me the guard said spitting out his stick. Not my business. Im here to check safe-conducts. If you want talk to our decurion.
And where might he be?
Hes basking in the sun over there behind the toll collectors lodgings the halberdier said looking not at Geralt but at the naked thighs of the Zerrikanians who were stretching languidly in their saddles.
Behind the toll collectors cottage sat a guard on a pile of dry logs drawing a woman in the sand with the end of his halberd. It was actually a certain part of a woman seen from an unusual perspective. Beside him a slim man with a fanciful plum bonnet pulled down over his eyes adorned with a silver buckle and a long twitching herons feather was reclining gently plucking the strings of a lute.
Geralt knew that bonnet and that feather which were famed from the Buina to the Yaruga known in manor houses fortresses inns taverns and whorehouses. Particularly whorehouses.
Dandelion!
Geralt the Witcher! A pair of cheerful cornflower-blue eyes shone from under the bonnet now shoved back on his head. Well I never! Youre here too? You dont have a safe-conduct by any chance?
Whats everyones problem with this safe-conduct? The Witcher dismounted. Whats happening here Dandelion? We wanted to cross the Braa myself and this knight Borch Three Jackdaws and our escort. And we cannot it appears.
I cant either Dandelion stood up took off his bonnet and bowed to the Zerrikanians with exaggerated courtesy. They dont want to let me cross either. This decurion here wont let me Dandelion the most celebrated minstrel and poet within a thousand miles through although hes also an artist as you can see.
I wont let anyone cross without a safe-conduct the decurion said resolutely at which he completed his drawing with a final detail prodding the end of his halberd shaft in the sand.
No matter the Witcher said. Well ride along the left bank. The road to Hengfors is longer that way but needs must.
To Hengfors? the bard said surprised. Arent you following Niedamir Geralt? And the dragon?
What dragon? Three Jackdaws asked with interest.
You dont know? You really dont know? Oh I shall have to tell you everything gentlemen. Im waiting here in any case; perhaps someone who knows me will come with a safe-conduct and let me join them. Please be seated.
Just a moment Three Jackdaws said. The sun is almost a quarter to the noontide and I have an awful thirst. We cannot talk on an empty stomach. Téa Véa head back to the town at a trot and buy a keg.
I like the cut of your jib sire…
Borch also known as Three Jackdaws.
Dandelion also known as the Unparalleled. By certain girls.
Talk Dandelion the Witcher said impatiently. We arent going to loiter around here till evening.
The bard seized the fingerboard of his lute and plucked the strings vigorously.
How would you prefer it in verse or in normal speech?
Normal speech.
As you please Dandelion said not putting his lute down. Listen then noble gentlemen to what occurred a week ago near the free town of Barefield. Twas thus that at the crack of dawn when the rising sun had barely tinged pink the shrouds of mist hanging pendent above the meadows—
It was supposed to be normal speech Geralt reminded him.
Isnt it? Very well very well. I understand. Concise without metaphors. A dragon alighted on the pastures outside Barefield.
Oh come on the Witcher said. It doesnt seem very likely to me. No one has seen a dragon in these parts for years. Wasnt it just a common or garden dracolizard? Dracolizard specimens can occasionally be as large as—
Dont insult me Witcher. I know what Im talking about. I saw it. As luck would have it I was at the market in Barefield and saw it all with my own eyes. The ballads composed but you didnt want—
Go on. Was it big?
The length of three horses. No taller than a horse at the withers but much fatter. Sand grey.
In other words green.
Yes. It swooped down unexpectedly flew right into a flock of sheep scattered the shepherds did for about a dozen beasts devoured four of them and flew away.
Flew away… Geralt shook his head. And that was all?
No. Because it came again the next day this time nearer to the town. It swooped down on a knot of women washing their linen on the banks of the Braa. And how they bolted old friend! Ive never laughed so much. Then the dragon circled Barefield a couple of times and flew towards the pastures where it fell on the sheep again. Only then did the chaos and confusion begin because few had believed the herdsmen before. The mayor called out the town constabulary and the guilds but before they could form up the plebs took matters into their own hands and did for it.
How?
In a forceful peasant manner. The local master cobbler a certain Sheepbagger came up with a way of dealing with the brute. They killed a sheep stuffed it full of hellebore deadly nightshade poison parsley brimstone and cobblers tar. Just to be sure the local apothecary poured in two quarts of his concoction for carbuncles and the priest from the temple of Kreve said prayers over the carcass. Then they stood the poisoned sheep among the flock held up by a stake. If truth be told no one believed the dragon would be lured by that shit which stank to high heaven but reality surpassed our expectations. Ignoring the living and bleating baa-lambs the reptile swallowed the bait and the stake.
And what then? Go on Dandelion.
What do you think Im doing? I am telling you. Listen to what happened next. In less time than a skilled man needs to unlace a womans corset the dragon suddenly began to roar and vent smoke from its front and rear ends. It turned somersaults tried to take off and then collapsed and lay still. Two volunteers set off to check whether the poisoned reptile was still breathing. It was the local gravedigger and the town halfwit the fruit of the union between the retarded daughter of a woodcutter and a squad of hired pikemen who marched through Barefield at the time of Warlord Nelumbos rebellion.
Now youre lying Dandelion.
Not lying just embellishing and theres a difference.
Not much of one. Speak on were wasting time.
Well then as I was saying the gravedigger and the doughty idiot set off as scouts. Afterwards we built them a small but pleasing burial mound.
Aha Borch said that means the dragon was still alive.
And how Dandelion said cheerfully. It was alive. But it was so weak it didnt devour either the gravedigger or the halfwit it just lapped up their blood. And then to general consternation it flew away taking flight with some difficulty. Every furlong it fell with a clatter and then rose again. It walked occasionally dragging its back legs. Some courageous individuals followed it keeping it in view. And do you know what?
Speak Dandelion.
The dragon disappeared among the ravines of the Kestrel Mountains near the source of the Braa and hid in the caves there.
Now everythings clear Geralt said. The dragon has probably lived in those caves for centuries in a state of torpor. Ive heard of cases like that. And his treasure hoard must be there too. Now I know why theyre blocking the bridge. Someone wants to get his greedy hands on the treasure. And that someone is Niedamir of Caingorn.
Exactly the troubadour confirmed. The whole of Barefield is fair seething for that reason because they claim that the dragon and its hoard belongs to them. But they hesitate to cross Niedamir. Niedamirs a young whelp who hasnt started shaving but hes already proved it doesnt pay to fall foul of him. And he wants that dragon like the very devil which is why hes reacted so fast.
Wants the treasure you mean.
Actually more the dragon than the treasure. For you see Niedamir has his eye on the kingdom of Malleore. A princess of a–so to speak–beddable age was left there after the sudden and odd death of the prince. The noblemen of Malleore look on Niedamir and the other suitors with reluctance for they know that the new ruler will keep them on a short leash–unlike the callow princess. So they dug up some dusty old prophecy saying that the mitre and the lasss hand belong to the man who vanquishes the dragon. Because no one had seen a dragon there for ages they thought they were safe. Niedamir of course laughed at the legend took Malleore by force and that was that but when the news of the Barefield dragon got out he realised he could hoist the Malleore nobility by their own petard. If he showed up there clutching the dragons head the people would greet him like a monarch sent by the gods and the noblemen wouldnt dare breathe a word. Does it surprise you then that he rushed after the dragon like a scalded cat? Particularly since its dead on its feet? For him its a real godsend a stroke of luck by thunder.
And hes shut the competition out.
So it would appear. And the people of Barefield. Except that he sent riders with safe-conducts throughout the countryside. Theyre for the ones who are supposed to actually kill the dragon because Niedamir himself is in no hurry to walk into a cave wielding a sword. In a flash he drafted in the most renowned dragon slayers. You probably know most of them Geralt.
Possibly. Who has turned up?
Eyck of Denesle to begin with.
Damn… the Witcher whistled softly. The pious and virtuous Eyck a knight without flaw or blemish in person.
Do you know him Geralt? Borch asked. Is he really the scourge of dragons?
Not just dragons. Eyck is a match for any monster. Hes even killed manticores and gryphons. Hes dispatched a few dragons so Ive heard. Hes good. But he spoils my business the swine because he doesnt take any money for it. Who else Dandelion?
The Crinfrid Reavers.
Well thats the dragon done for. Even if it has recovered. That trio are a good team. They fight pretty dirty but theyre effective. Theyve wiped out all the dracolizards and forktails in Redania not to mention three red and one black dragon which they also dispatched and thats no mean feat. Is that everybody?
No. Six dwarves under the command of Yarpen Zigrin have joined in.
I dont know him.
But you have heard of the dragon Ocvist from Quartz Mountain?
Yes. And I saw some gemstones from its hoard. There were sapphires of remarkable colour and diamonds as large as cherries.
Well know you that because Yarpen Zigrin and his dwarves did for Ocvist. A ballad was composed about it but it was lousy because it wasnt one of mine. Youve missed nothing if you havent heard it.
Is that everybody?
Yes. Not counting you. You claim not to know about the dragon. Who knows perhaps thats true? But now you do. Well?
Nothing. That dragon doesnt interest me.
Hah! Very crafty Geralt. Because you dont have a safe-conduct anyway.
The dragon doesnt interest me I told you. But what about you Dandelion? What draws you here?
The usual the troubadour shrugged. I need to be near the action and the excitement. Everyone will be talking about the fight with the dragon. Of course I could compose a ballad based on reports but itll sound different sung by someone who saw the fight with his own eyes.
Fight? Three Jackdaws laughed. More like some kind of pig-sticking or a carcass being quartered. Im listening and Im astounded. Celebrated warriors rushing here as fast as they can to finish off a half-dead dragon poisoned by a peasant. It makes me want to laugh and vomit.
Youre wrong Geralt said. If the dragon hasnt expired from the poison its constitution has probably already fought it off and its back at full strength. It actually doesnt make much difference. The Crinfrid Reavers will kill it anyway but itll put up a fight if you want to know.
So youre betting on the Reavers Geralt?
Naturally.
Dont be so sure. The artistic guard who had been silent up to then spoke up. A dragon is a magical creature and you cant kill it any other way than with spells. If anybody can deal with it then its that sorceress who rode through yesterday.
Who was that? Geralt cocked his head.
A sorceress the guard repeated I told you.
Did she give her name?
She did but Ive forgotten it. She had a safe-conduct. She was young comely in her own way but those eyes… You know how it is sire. You come over all cold when they look at you.
Know anything about this Dandelion? Who could it be?
No the bard grimaced. Young comely and those eyes. Some help that is. Theyre all like that. Not one of them that I know–and I know plenty–looks older than twenty-five thirty; though some of them Ive heard can recall the times when the forest soughed as far as where Novigrad stands today. Anyway what are elixirs and mandrake for? And they also sprinkle mandrake in their eyes to make them shine. As women will.
Was her hair red? the Witcher asked.
No sire the decurion said. Coal-black.
And her horse what colour was it? Chestnut with a white star?
No. Black like her hair. Well gentlemen Im telling you shell kill the dragon. A dragons a job for a sorcerer. Human strength isnt enough against it.
I wonder what the cobbler Sheepbagger would have to say about that Dandelion laughed. If hed had something stronger to hand than hellebore and deadly nightshade the dragons skin would be drying on the Barefield stockade the ballad would be ready and I wouldnt be fading in this sun…
Why exactly didnt Niedamir take you with him? Geralt asked looking askance at the poet. You were in Barefield when he set off after all. Could it be that the king doesnt like artists? How come youre fading here instead of strumming an air by the royal stirrups?
The cause was a certain young widow Dandelion said dejectedly. The hell with it. I tarried and the next day Niedamir and the others were already over the river. They even took that Sheepbagger with them and some scouts from the Barefield constabulary; they just forgot about me. Ive explained it to the decurion but he keeps repeating—
If theres a safe-conduct I let you through the halberdier said dispassionately relieving himself on the wall of the toll collectors cottage. If there isnt I dont let you through. Ive got me orders—
Oh Three Jackdaws interrupted him the girls are returning with the beer.
And they arent alone Dandelion added standing up. Look at that horse. Big as a dragon.
The Zerrikanians galloped up from the birch wood flanking a rider sitting on a large restless warhorse.
The Witcher also stood up.
The rider was wearing a long purple velvet kaftan with silver braid and a short coat trimmed with sable fur. Sitting erect in the saddle he looked imperiously down at them. Geralt knew that kind of look. And was not fond of it.
Greetings gentlemen. I am Dorregaray the rider introduced himself dismounting slowly and with dignity. Master Dorregaray. Sorcerer.
Master Geralt. Witcher.
Master Dandelion. Poet.
Borch also known as Three Jackdaws. And my girls who are removing the bung from that keg you have already met Master Dorregaray.
That is so indeed the sorcerer said without a smile. We exchanged bows I and the beautiful warriors from Zerrikania.
Well then cheers Dandelion distributed the leather cups brought by Véa. Drink with us Master Sorcerer. My Lord Borch shall I also serve the decurion?
Of course. Join us soldier.
I presume the sorcerer said after taking a small distinguished sip that the same purpose has brought you gentlemen to the barrier on the bridge as it has me?
If you have the dragon in mind Master Dorregaray Dandelion said that is so indeed. I want to be there and compose a ballad. Unfortunately that decurion there clearly a fellow without refinement doesnt want to let me through. He demands a safe-conduct.
I beg your pardon the halberdier said draining his cup and smacking his lips. Ive been ordered on pain of death not to let anyone through without a safe-conduct. And Im told the whole of Barefield has already gathered with wagons and plans to head up after the dragon. I have my orders—
Your orders soldier Dorregaray frowned apply to the rabble who might hinder; trollops who might spread debauchery and foul sicknesses; thieves scum and rabble. But not to me.
I wont let anyone through without a safe-conduct the decurion glowered I swear—
Dont swear Three Jackdaws interrupted him. Better to have another drink. Téa pour this stout-hearted soldier a beer. And let us be seated gentlemen. Drinking standing up in a rush and without due reverence does not become the nobility.
They sat down on logs around the keg. The halberdier newly raised to nobility blushed with pleasure.
Drink brave centurion Three Jackdaws urged.
But I am a decurion not a centurion the halberdier said blushing even more intensely.
But you will be a centurion for certain Borch grinned. Youre an astute fellow youll be promoted in no time.
Dorregaray declining a refill turned towards Geralt.
People are still talking about the basilisk in town Witcher sir and you now have your eye on the dragon I see he said softly. I wonder whether youre so short of money or whether you murder endangered creatures for the simple pleasure of it.
Curious interest Geralt answered coming from someone who is rushing not to be late for the butchering of a dragon in order to knock out its teeth so crucial after all in the making of magical cures and elixirs. Is it true sorcerer sir that the best ones are those removed from a living dragon?
Are you certain that is why I am going there?
I am. But someone has already beaten you to it Dorregaray. A female companion of yours has already gone through with a safe-conduct which you dont have. She is black-haired if thats of any interest to you.
On a black horse?
Apparently.
Yennefer Dorregaray said glumly. Unnoticed by anybody the Witcher twitched.
A silence fell broken only by the belching of the future centurion.
Nobody… without a safe-conduct…
Will two hundred lintars suffice? Geralt calmly took from his pocket the purse received from the fat Alderman.
Ah Geralt Three Jackdaws smiled mysteriously so you—
My apologies Borch. Im sorry but I wont ride with you to Hengfors. Another time perhaps. Perhaps well meet again.
I have no interest in going to Hengfors Three Jackdaws said slowly. Not at all Geralt.
Put away that purse sire the future centurion said menacingly thats sheer bribery. I wont even let you through for three hundred.
And for five hundred? Borch took out his pouch. Put away that purse Geralt. Ill pay the toll. This has begun to amuse me. Five hundred soldier sir. One hundred a piece counting my girls as one gorgeous item. What?
Oh dear oh dear the future centurion said distressed stowing Borchs pouch away under his jacket. What will I tell the king?
Tell him Dorregaray said straightening up and removing an ornate ivory wand from his belt that you were overcome by fear when you saw it.
Saw what sire?
The sorcerer flourished his wand and shouted an incantation. A pine tree on the riverbank burst into flames. In one moment the entire tree was engulfed from top to bottom in a blaze of fire.
To horse! cried Dandelion springing up and slinging his lute across his back. To horse gentlemen! And ladies!
Raise the barrier! the rich decurion with a good chance of becoming a centurion shouted to the halberdiers.
On the bridge beyond the barrier Véa reined in her horse. It skittered hooves thudding on the planking. The woman tossing her plaits screamed piercingly.
Thats right Véa! Three Jackdaws shouted back. Onwards my lords. To horse! Well ride in the Zerrikanian fashion with a thundering and a yelling!
IV
Well just look said the oldest of the Reavers Boholt massive and burly like the trunk of an old oak tree. So Niedamir didnt chase you away my good sirs though I was certain he would. But its not for us paupers to question royal commands. Join us by the campfire. Make yourselves a pallet boys. And between you and me Witcher what did you talk to the king about?
About nothing Geralt said making himself comfortable by leaning back against his saddle which he had dragged over beside the fire. He didnt even come out of his tent to talk to us. He just sent that flunky of his whats his name…
Gyllenstiern said Yarpen Zigrin a stocky bearded dwarf who was rolling a huge resinous tree stump he had dragged from the undergrowth into the fire. Pompous upstart. Fat hog. When we joined the hunt he came over nose stuck up towards the heavens pooh-pooh remember you dwarves he says whos in command who you have to obey King Niedamir gives the orders here and his word is law and so on. I stood and listened and I thought to myself Ill have my lads knock him to the ground and Ill piss all over his cape. But I dropped the idea you know because word would get around again that dwarves are nasty that theyre aggressive that theyre whoresons and its impossible to live with them in… what the hell was it?… harmonium or whatever it is. And right away thered be another pogrom somewhere in some little town or other. So I just listened politely and nodded.
It looks like thats all Lord Gyllenstiern knows Geralt said because he said the same to us and all we did was nod too.
And I reckon the second Reaver said spreading a blanket over a pile of brushwood it was a bad thing Niedamir didnt chase you away. Doesnt bear thinking how many people are after this dragon. Swarms of them. Its not a hunting expedition no more its a funeral procession. I need elbow room when Im fighting.
Come off it Gar Boholt said the more the merrier. What never hunted a dragon before? Theres always a swarm of people behind a dragon a noisy rabble a veritable bordello on wheels. But when the reptile shows up guess whos left standing in the field. Us thats who.
Boholt was silent for a moment took a long draw from a large wicker-bound demijohn blew his nose loudly and coughed.
Another thing he continued. In practice its often only after the dragons been killed that the merrymaking and bloodletting begins and the heads start rolling. Its only when the treasures being shared out that the hunters go for each others throats. Right Geralt? Oi? Am I right? Witcher Im talking to you.
Im aware of cases like that Geralt concurred dryly.
Aware you say. No doubt from hearsay because I cant say Ive ever heard of you stalking a dragon. Never in all my born days have I heard of a witcher hunting dragons. Which makes it all the stranger youre here.
True drawled Kennet also known as Beanpole the youngest Reaver. Thats strange. And we—
Wait Beanpole Im talking Boholt cut in and besides I dont plan to talk for too long. Anyway the Witcher knows what Im on about. I know him and he knows me and up to now we havent got in each others way and we probably never will. See lads if I wanted to disrupt the Witchers work or snatch the loot from under his nose the Witcher would waste no time slashing me with that witcher razor of his and hed be within his rights. Agreed?
No one seconded or challenged this. There was nothing to suggest that Boholt cared either way.
Aye he continued the more the merrier as I said. And the Witcher may prove useful to the company. Its wild and deserted round here and should a frightener or ilyocoris or a striga jump out at us there might be trouble. But if Geralts standing by there wont be any trouble because thats his speciality. But dragons arent his speciality. Right?
Once more no one seconded or challenged this.
Lord Three Jackdaws is with Geralt continued Boholt handing the demijohn to Yarpen and thats enough of a guarantee for me. So whos bothering you Gar Beanpole? Cant be Dandelion can it?
Dandelion Yarpen Zigrin said passing the demijohn to the bard always tags along whenever something interestings happening and everybody knows he doesnt interfere doesnt help and wont slow the march down. Bit like a burr on a dogs tail. Right boys?
The boys–stocky bearded dwarves–cackled shaking their beards. Dandelion pushed his bonnet back and drank from the demijohn.
Oooh bloody hell he groaned gasping for air. It takes your voice away. What was it distilled from scorpions?
Theres one thing irking me Geralt Beanpole said taking the demijohn from the minstrel and thats you bringing that sorcerer along. We can hardly move for sorcerers.
Thats true the dwarf butted in. Beanpoles right. We need that Dorregaray like a pig needs a saddle. For some time now weve had our very own witch the noble Yennefer. Ugh. He spat her name.
Yes indeed Boholt said scratching himself on his bull neck from which a moment earlier he had unfastened a leather collar bristling with steel studs. There are too many sorcerers here gentlemen. Two too many to be precise. And theyre a sight too thick with our Niedamir. Just look were under the stars around a fire and they gentlemen are in the warm plotting in the royal tent the cunning foxes. Niedamir the witch the wizard and Gyllenstiern. And Yennefers the worst. And do you want to know what theyre plotting? How to cheat us thats what.
And stuffing themselves with venison Beanpole interjected gloomily. And what did we eat? Marmot! And whats a marmot I ask you? A rat nothing else. So what have we eaten? Rat!
Never mind Gar said Well soon be sampling dragons tail. Theres nothing like dragons tail roasted over charcoal.
Yennefer Boholt went on is a foul nasty mouthy bint. Not like your lasses Lord Borch. They are quiet and agreeable just look theyve sat down by the horses theyre sharpening their sabres. I walked past said something witty they smiled and showed their little teeth. Yes Im glad theyre here not like Yennefer all she does is scheme and scheme. And I tell you we have to watch out because well end up with shit all from our agreement.
What agreement Boholt?
Well Yarpen do we tell the Witcher?
Aint got nothing against it the dwarf answered.
Theres no more booze Beanpole interjected turning the demijohn upside down.
Get some then. Youre the youngest mlord. The agreement was our idea Geralt because we arent hirelings or paid servants and we wont be having Niedamir send us after that dragon and then toss a few pieces of gold in our direction. The truth is well cope with that dragon without Niedamir but Niedamir wont cope without us. So its clear from that whos worth more and whose share should be bigger. And we put the case fairly–whoever takes on the dragon in mortal combat and bests it takes half of the treasure hoard. Niedamir by virtue of his birthright and title takes a quarter in any event. And the rest provided they help will share the remaining quarter between themselves equally. What do you think about that?
And what does Niedamir think about it?
He said neither yes nor no. But hed better not put up a fight the whippersnapper. I told you he wont take on the dragon himself he has to count on experts which means us the Reavers and Yarpen and his lads. We and no one else will meet the dragon at a swords length. The rest including the sorcerers if they give honest assistance will share a quarter of the treasure among themselves.
Who do you include in the rest apart from the sorcerers? Dandelion asked with interest.
Certainly not buskers and poetasters Yarpen Zigrin cackled. We include those who put in some work with a battle-axe not a lute.
Aha Three Jackdaws said looking up at the starry sky. And how will the cobbler Sheepbagger and his rabble be contributing?
Yarpen Zigrin spat into the campfire muttering something in dwarven.
The constabulary from Barefield know these bloody mountains and will act as guides Boholt said softly hence it will be fair to allow them a share of the spoils. Its a slightly different matter with the cobbler. You see it will go ill if the peasantry become convinced that when a dragon shows up in the land instead of sending for professionals they can casually poison it and go back to humping wenches in the long grass. If such a practice became widespread wed probably have to start begging. Yes?
Thats right Yarpen added. For which reason I tell you something bad ought to befall that cobbler before the bastard passes into legend.
If its meant to befall him itll befall him Gar said with conviction. Leave it to me.
And Dandelion the dwarf took up will blacken his name in a ballad make him look a fool. So that hell suffer shame and dishonour for generations to come.
Youve forgotten about one thing Geralt said. Theres one person here who could throw a spoke in the wheel. Who wont assent to any divisions or agreements. I mean Eyck of Denesle. Have you talked to him?
What about? Boholt said grinding his teeth using a stout stick to move the logs around in the campfire. You wont get anywhere with Eyck Geralt. He knows nothing about business.
As we rode up to your camp Three Jackdaws said we met him. He was kneeling on the rocks in full armour staring at the sky.
Hes always doing that Beanpole said. Hes meditating or saying his prayers. He says he must because he has orders from the gods to protect people from evil.
Back home in Crinfrid Boholt muttered we keep people like that on a chain in the cowshed and give them a piece of coal so they can draw outlandish pictures on the walls. But thats enough gossip about my neighbours were talking business.
A petite young woman with black hair held tightly by a gold hairnet wrapped in a woollen cloak noiselessly entered the circle of light.
What reeks so much round here? Yarpen Zigrin asked pretending not to see her. Not brimstone is it?
No Boholt glancing to the side and sniffing pointedly its musk or some other scent.
No it has to be… the dwarf grimaced. Oh! Why its the noble Madam Yennefer! Welcome welcome.
The sorceresss eyes slowly swept over the company her shining eyes coming to rest for a while on the Witcher. Geralt smiled faintly.
May I join you?
But of course good lady Boholt said and hiccoughed. Sit down here on the saddle. Move your arse Kennet and give the noble sorceress the saddle.
From what I hear youre talking business gentlemen. Yennefer sat down stretching out her shapely black-stockinged legs in front of her. Without me?
We didnt dare Yarpen Zigrin said trouble such an important personage.
If would be better Yarpen–Yennefer narrowed her eyes turning her head towards the dwarf–if you kept quiet. From the very first day youve been treating me as if I were nothing but air so please continue dont let me bother you. Because it doesnt bother me either.
Really mlady Yarpens smile revealed uneven teeth. May I be infested by ticks if I havent been treating you better than the air. Ive been known for example to spoil the air which theres no way Id dare to do in your presence.
The bearded boys roared with thunderous laughter but fell silent immediately at the sight of the blue glow which suddenly enveloped the sorceress.
One more word and youll end as spoiled air Yarpen Yennefer said in a voice with a metallic edge and a black stain on the grass.
Indeed Boholt cleared his throat relieving the silence that had fallen. Quiet Zigrin. Lets hear what Madam Yennefer has to say to us. She just complained that were talking about business without her. From which I conclude she has some kind of offer for us. Lets hear my lords what kind of offer it is. As long as she doesnt suggest killing the dragon by herself using spells.
And what if I do? Yennefer raised her head. Dont think its possible Boholt?
It might be possible. But its not profitable because youd be certain to demand half the dragons hoard.
At least half the sorceress said coldly.
Well you see for yourself theres no profit in it for us. We my lady are poor warriors and if the loot passes us by hunger will come beckoning. We live on sorrel and pigweed…
Only once in a blue moon do we manage to catch a marmot Yarpen Zigrin interrupted in a sombre voice.
… we drink spring water Boholt took a swig from the demijohn and shuddered slightly. Theres no choice for us Madam Yennefer. Its either loot or freeze to death in the winter huddled against a fence. For inns cost money.
Beer does too Gar added.
And dirty strumpets Beanpole said daydreaming.
Which is why Boholt said looking up at the sky we will kill the dragon by ourselves without spells and without your help.
Are you certain about that? Just remember there are limits to what is possible Boholt.
Perhaps there are but Ive never come across them. No mlady. I repeat well kill the dragon ourselves without any spells.
Particularly Yarpen Zigrin added since spells surely have their own limits which unlike our own we dont know.
Did you come up with that yourself? Yennefer asked slowly. Or did someone put you up to it? Does the presence of the Witcher in this select company give you the right to such brazenness?
No Boholt replied looking at Geralt who seemed to be dozing stretched out lazily on a blanket with his saddle beneath his head the Witcher has nothing to do with it. Listen noble Yennefer. We put forward a proposition to the king but he hasnt honoured us with an answer. Were patient well wait till the morning. Should the king agree to a settlement we ride on together. If not we go back.
Us too the dwarf snarled.
There wont be any bargaining Boholt continued. Take it or leave it. Repeat our words to Niedamir Madam Yennefer. And Ill tell you; a deals also good for you and for Dorregaray if you come to an agreement with him. We dont need the dragons carcass mark you well take but the tail. And the rest is yours you can have whatever you want. We wont stint you with the teeth or the brain; well keep nothing that you need for sorcery.
Of course Yarpen Zigrin added chuckling the carrion will be for you sorcerers no one will take it from you. Unless some other vultures do.
Yennefer stood up throwing her cloak over her shoulder.
Niedamir wont wait until morning she said sharply. He has agreed to your conditions already. Against mine and Dorregarays advice mark you.
Niedamir Boholt slowly drawled is displaying astonishing wisdom for one so young. To me Madam Yennefer wisdom includes the ability to turn a deaf ear to foolish or insincere advice.
Yarpen Zigrin snorted into his beard.
Youll be singing a different tune the sorceress put her hands on her hips when the dragon lacerates and perforates you and shatters your shinbones. Youll be licking my shoes and begging for help. As usual. How well oh how very well do I know your sort. I know you so well it makes me sick.
She turned away and disappeared into the gloom without saying goodbye.
In my day Yarpen Zigrin said sorceresses stayed in their towers read learned books and stirred cauldrons. They didnt get under warriors feet didnt interfere in our business. And didnt wiggle their bottoms in front of a fellow.
Frankly speaking she can wiggle all she likes Dandelion said tuning his lute. Right Geralt? Geralt? Hey wheres the Witcher?
What do we care? Boholt muttered throwing another log on the fire. He went somewhere. Perhaps he had to relieve himself my lord. Its his business.
Thats right the bard agreed and strummed the strings. Shall I sing you something?
Sing dammit Yarpen Zigrin said and spat. But dont be thinking Dandelion that Ill give you as much as a shilling for your bleating. Its not the royal court son.
I can see that the troubadour nodded.
Yennefer.
She turned around as though surprised though the Witcher was in doubt she had heard his steps well before. She placed a small wooden pail on the floor straightened up and brushed aside some hair which had freed itself from her golden hairnet and fell in curls onto her shoulders.
Geralt.
She was wearing just two colours as usual: black and white. Black hair long black eyelashes forcing one to guess the colour of the eyes concealed beneath them. A black skirt and a short black tunic with a white fur collar. A white blouse of the sheerest linen. On her neck a black velvet ribbon adorned with an obsidian star bestrewn with tiny diamonds.
You havent changed at all.
Neither have you she sneered. And in both cases it is equally normal. Or if you prefer equally abnormal. In any case the mention of it though it may not be a bad way to begin the conversation is meaningless. Am I right?
You are he nodded looking to one side towards Niedamirs tent and the fires of the royal bowmen obscured by the dark shapes of wagons. From the more distant campfire floated Dandelions sonorous voice singing The Stars above the Path one of his most popular romantic ballads.
Well now that we have the preliminaries out of the way the sorceress said I wonder whats coming next.
You see Yennefer—
I see she interrupted sharply But I dont understand. Why did you come here Geralt? Surely not because of the dragon? I presume nothing has changed in that regard?
No. Nothings changed.
Why then I pray have you joined the party?
If I said that it was because of you would you believe me?
She looked at him in silence and there was something in her flashing eyes which Geralt did not like.
I believe you why not? she finally said. Men like to meet their former lovers like to relive memories. They like to imagine that erstwhile erotic ecstasies give them some kind of perpetual ownership of their partner. It enhances their self-importance. You are no exception. In spite of everything.
Nevertheless he smiled youre right Yennefer. The sight of you makes me feel wonderful. In other words Im glad to see you.
And is that all? Well lets say Im also glad. Having said that I wish you goodnight. I am retiring for the night as you can see. Before that I intend to bathe and I usually get undressed to perform that activity. Withdraw then in order graciously to assure me a minimum of discretion.
Yen he held his hands out to her.
Dont call me that! she hissed furiously springing back blue and red sparks streaming from her extended fingers. And if you touch me Ill scorch your eyes out you bastard.
The Witcher moved back. The sorceress somewhat calmer brushed her hair aside once again and stood before him with her fists resting on her hips.
What did you think Geralt? That wed have a nice cheerful gossip that wed reminisce about the old days? That perhaps at the end of our chat wed get onto a wagon and make love on the sheepskins just like that for old times sake? Did you?
Geralt not certain if the sorceress was magically reading his mind or had only guessed right kept silent smiling wryly.
Those four years left their mark Geralt. Im over it now which is the only reason why I didnt spit in your eyes during todays encounter. But dont let my civility deceive you.
Yennefer…
Be quiet! I gave you more than Ive ever given any other man you scoundrel. I dont know myself why I gave it to you. And you… Oh no my dear. Im not a slut or an elf-woman met by chance in the forest who can be discarded in the morning walked out on without being woken with a posy of violets left on the table. Who can be made a mockery of. Beware! Utter a single word and you will regret it!
Geralt did not utter a single word correctly sensing the anger seething in Yennefer.
The sorceress once again brushed aside some unruly locks and looked him in the eyes from close up.
Weve met thats too bad she said softly. But we shall not make a spectacle of ourselves for everybody. We shall save face. Well pretend to be good friends. But dont be mistaken Geralt. There is nothing between us now. Nothing understood? And be glad of it because it means I have now abandoned the plans which until recently I still harboured regarding you. But that in no way means Ive forgiven you. I shall never forgive you Witcher. Never.
She turned around suddenly seized the pail spraying water around and disappeared behind a wagon.
Geralt chased away a mosquito whining above his ear and slowly walked back towards the campfire where Dandelions performance was being rewarded with half-hearted applause. He looked up at the dark blue sky above the black serrated saw blade of the mountain peaks. He felt like bursting out laughing. He did not know why.
Careful up there! Take heed! Boholt called turning around on the coachmans seat to look back towards the column. Closer to the rocks! Take heed!
The wagons trundled along bouncing on stones. The wagoners swore lashing the horses with their reins and leaning out. They glanced anxiously to see if the wheels were sufficiently far from the edge of the ravine along which ran a narrow uneven road. Below at the bottom of the chasm the waters of the River Braa foamed white among the boulders.
Geralt reined back his horse pressing himself against the rock wall which was covered with sparse brown moss and white lichen. He let the Reavers wagon overtake him. Beanpole galloped up from the head of the column where he had been leading the cavalcade with the Barefield scouts.
Right! he shouted With a will! It widens out up ahead!
King Niedamir and Gyllenstiern both on horseback accompanied by several mounted bowmen came alongside Geralt. Behind them rattled the wagons of the royal caravan. Even further back trundled the dwarves wagon driven by Yarpen Zigrin who was yelling relentlessly.
Niedamir a very thin freckled youngster in a white sheepskin jacket passed the Witcher casting him a haughty though distinctly bored look. Gyllenstiern straightened up and reined in his horse.
Over here Witcher sir he said overbearingly.
Yes? Geralt jabbed his mare with his heels and rode slowly over to the chancellor behind the caravan. He was astonished that in spite of having such an impressive paunch Gyllenstiern preferred horseback to a comfortable ride in a wagon.
Yesterday Gyllenstiern said gently tugging his gold-studded reins and throwing a turquoise cape off his shoulder yesterday you said the dragon does not interest you. What does interest you then Witcher sir? Why do you ride with us?
Its a free country chancellor.
For the moment. But in this cortege my dear Geralt everyone should know his place. And the role he is to fulfil according to the will of King Niedamir. Do you comprehend that?
What are you driving at my dear Gyllenstiern?
I shall tell you. Ive heard that it has recently become tiresome to negotiate with you witchers. The thing is that whenever a witcher is shown a monster to be killed the witcher rather than take his sword and slaughter it begins to ponder whether it is right whether it is transgressing the limits of what is possible whether it is not contrary to the code and whether the monster really is a monster as though it wasnt clear at first glance. It seems to me that you are simply doing too well. In my day witchers didnt have two pennies to rub together just two stinking boots. They didnt question they slaughtered what they were ordered to whether it was a werewolf a dragon or a tax collector. All that counted was a clean cut. So Geralt?
Do you have a job for me Gyllenstiern? the Witcher asked coldly. If so tell me what. Ill think it over. But if you dont theres no sense wasting our breath is there?
Job? the chancellor sighed. No I dont. This all concerns a dragon and that clearly transgresses your limits Witcher. So I prefer the Reavers. I merely wanted to alert you. Warn you. King Niedamir and I may tolerate the whims of witchers and their classification of monsters into good and bad but we do not wish to hear about them much less see them effected in our presence. Dont meddle in royal matters Witcher. And dont consort with Dorregaray.
I am not accustomed to consorting with sorcerers. Why such an inference?
Dorregaray Gyllenstiern said surpasses even witchers with his whims. He does not stop at categorising monsters into good and bad. He considers them all good.
Thats overstating the case somewhat.
Clearly. But he defends his views with astonishing obstinacy. I truly would not be surprised if something befell him. And the fact he joined us keeping such curious company—
I am not Dorregarays companion. And neither is he mine.
Dont interrupt. The company is strange. A witcher crawling with scruples like a foxs pelt with fleas. A sorcerer spouting druidic humbug about equilibrium in nature. The silent knight Borch Three Jackdaws and his escort from Zerrikania where–as is generally known–sacrifices are made before the image of a dragon. And suddenly they all join in the hunt. Strange isnt it?
If you insist then yes it is.
Know then the chancellor said that the most mysterious problems find–as experience proves–the simplest solutions. Dont compel me Witcher to use them.
I dont understand.
Oh but you do. Thank you for the conversation Geralt.
Geralt stopped. Gyllenstiern urged his horse on and joined the king catching up with the caravan. Eyck of Denesle rode alongside wearing a quilted kaftan of light-coloured leather marked with the impressions of a breastplate pulling a packhorse laden with a suit of armour a uniformly silver shield and a powerful lance. Geralt greeted him by raising his hand but the knight errant turned his head to the side tightening his thin lips and spurred his horse on.
He isnt keen on you Dorregaray said riding over. Eh Geralt?
Clearly.
Competition isnt it? The two of you have similar occupations. Except that Eyck is an idealist and you are a professional. A minor difference particularly for the ones you kill.
Dont compare me to Eyck Dorregaray. The devil knows who you wrong with that comparison him or me but dont compare us.
As you wish. To me frankly speaking you are equally loathsome.
Thank you.
Dont mention it the sorcerer patted the neck of his horse which had been scared by all the yelling from Yarpen and his dwarves. To me Witcher calling killing a vocation is loathsome low and nonsensical. Our world is in equilibrium. The annihilation the killing of any creatures that inhabit this world upsets that equilibrium. And a lack of equilibrium brings closer extinction; extinction and the end of the world as we know it.
A druidic theory Geralt pronounced. I know it. An old hierophant expounded it to me once back in Rivia. Two days after our conversation he was torn apart by wererats. It was impossible to prove any upset in equilibrium.
The world I repeat Dorregaray glanced at him indifferently is in equilibrium. Natural equilibrium. Every species has its own natural enemies every one is the natural enemy of other species. That also includes humans. The extermination of the natural enemies of humans which you dedicate yourself to and which one can begin to observe threatens the degeneration of the race.
Do you know what sorcerer? Geralt said annoyed. One day take yourself to a mother whose child has been devoured by a basilisk and tell her she ought to be glad because thanks to that the human race has escaped degeneration. See what she says to you.
A good argument Witcher Yennefer said riding up to them on her large black horse. And you Dorregaray be careful what you say.
Im not accustomed to concealing my views.
Yennefer rode between them. The Witcher noticed that the golden hairnet had been replaced by a rolled up white kerchief.
Start concealing them as quickly as possible Dorregaray she said especially before Niedamir and the Reavers who already suspect you plan to interfere in the killing of the dragon. As long as you only talk they treat you like a harmless maniac. If however you try to start anything theyll break your neck before you manage to let out a sigh.
The sorcerer smiled contemptuously and condescendingly.
And besides Yennefer continued by expressing those views you damage the solemnity of our profession and vocation.
How so?
You can apply your theory to all sorts of creatures and vermin Dorregaray. But not to dragons. For dragons are the natural greatest enemies of man. And I do not refer to the degeneration of the human race but to its survival. In order to survive one has to crush ones enemies enemies which might prevent that survival.
Dragons arent mans enemies Geralt broke in. The sorceress looked at him and smiled. But only with her lips.
In that matter she said leave the judging to us humans. Your role Witcher is not to judge. Its to get a job done.
Like a programmed servile golem?
That was your comparison not mine Yennefer replied coldly. But well its apt.
Yennefer Dorregaray said for a woman of your education and age you are coming out with some astonishing tripe. Why is it that dragons have been promoted in your eyes to become the foremost enemies of man? Why not other–a hundredfold more dangerous–creatures those that have a hundredfold more victims on their consciences than dragons? Why not hirikkas forktails manticores amphisbaenas or gryphons? Why not wolves?
Ill tell you why not. The advantage of men over other races and species the fight for their due place in nature for living space can only be won when nomadism wandering from place to place in search of sustenance in accordance with natures calendar is finally eliminated. Otherwise the proper rhythm of reproduction will not be achieved since human children are dependent for too long. Only a woman safe and secure behind town walls or in a stronghold can bear children according to the proper rhythm which means once a year. Fecundity Dorregaray is growth is the condition for survival and domination. And now we come to dragons. Only a dragon and no other monster can threaten a town or stronghold. Were dragons not to be wiped out people would–for their own safety–disperse instead of cleaving together because dragons fire in a densely populated settlement is a nightmare means hundreds of victims and terrible destruction. That is why dragons must be utterly wiped out Dorregaray.
Dorregaray looked at her with a strange smile on his face.
Do you know what Yennefer I wouldnt like to see the day your idea of the dominance of man comes about when people like you will occupy their due place in nature. Fortunately it will never come to that. You would rather poison or slaughter each other expire from typhoid fever and typhus because it is filth and lice–and not dragons–which threaten your splendid cities where women are delivered of children once a year but where only one new-born baby in ten lives longer than ten days. Yes Yennefer fecundity fecundity and once again fecundity. So take up bearing children my dear; its the most natural pursuit for you. It will occupy the time you are currently fruitlessly wasting on dreaming up nonsense. Farewell.
Urging on his horse the sorcerer galloped off towards the head of the column. Geralt having glanced at Yennefers pale furiously twisted face began to feel sorry for him in advance. He knew what this was about. Yennefer like most sorceresses was barren. But unlike most sorceresses she bemoaned the fact and reacted with genuine rage at the mention of it. Dorregaray certainly knew that. But he probably did not know how vengeful she was.
Hes in trouble she hissed. Oh yes. Beware Geralt. Dont think that when the time comes and you dont show good sense Ill protect you.
Never fear he smiled. We–and I mean witchers and servile golems–always act sensibly. Since the limits within which we operate are clearly and explicitly demarcated.
Well I never Yennefer said looking at him still pale. Youre taking umbrage like a tart whose lack of chastity has been pointed out to her. Youre a witcher you cant change that. Your vocation…
Thats enough about vocations Yen because its beginning to make me queasy.
I told you not to call me that. And Im not especially bothered about your queasiness. Nor any other reactions in your limited witchers range of reactions.
Nevertheless youll see some of them if you dont stop plying me with tales about lofty missions and the fight between good and evil. And about dragons; the dreadful enemies of the human tribe. I know better.
Oh yes? The sorceress narrowed her eyes. And what do you know Witcher?
Only Geralt said ignoring the sudden warning vibration of the medallion around his neck that if dragons didnt have treasure hoards not a soul would be interested in them; and certainly not sorcerers. Isnt it interesting that whenever a dragon is being hunted some sorcerer closely linked to the Goldsmiths Guild is always hanging around. Just like you. And later although a deal of gemstones ought to end up on the market it never happens and their price doesnt go down. So dont talk to me about vocation and the fight for the survival of the race. I know you too well have known you too long.
Too long she repeated sneering malevolently. Unfortunately. But dont think you know me well you whores son. Dammit how stupid Ive been… Oh go to hell! I cant stand the sight of you!
She screamed yanked her horses reins and galloped fiercely ahead. The Witcher reined back his mount and let through the wagon of dwarves yelling cursing and whistling through bone pipes. Among them sprawled on some sacks of oats lay Dandelion plucking his lute.
Hey! roared Yarpen Zigrin who was sitting on the box pointing at Yennefer. Theres something black on the trail! I wonder what it is? It looks like a nag!
Without doubt! Dandelion shouted shoving his plum bonnet back Its a nag! Riding a gelding! Astounding!
The beards of Yarpens boys shook in general laughter. Yennefer pretended not to hear.
Geralt reined back his horse again and let Niedamirs mounted bowmen through. Borch was riding slowly some distance beyond them and the Zerrikanians brought up the rear just behind him. Geralt waited for them to catch up and led his mare alongside Borchs horse. They rode on in silence.
Witcher Three Jackdaws suddenly said I want to ask you a question.
Ask it.
Why dont you turn back?
The Witcher looked at him in silence for a moment.
Do you really want to know?
Yes I do Three Jackdaws said turning his face towards Geralt.
Im riding with them because Im a servile golem. Because Im a wisp of oakum blown by the wind along the highway. Tell me where should I go? And for what? At least here some people have gathered with whom I have something to talk about. People who dont break off their conversations when I approach. People who though they may not like me say it to my face and dont throw stones from behind a fence. Im riding with them for the same reason I rode with you to the log drivers inn. Because its all the same to me. I dont have a goal to head towards. I dont have a destination at the end of the road.
Three Jackdaws cleared his throat.
Theres a destination at the end of every road. Everybody has one. Even you although you like to think youre somehow different.
Now Ill ask you a question.
Ask it.
Do you have a destination at the end of the road?
I do.
Lucky for you.
It is not a matter of luck Geralt. It is a matter of what you believe in and what you serve. No one ought to know that better than… than a witcher.
I keep hearing about goals today Geralt sighed. Niedamirs aim is to seize Malleore. Eyck of Denesles calling is to protect people from dragons. Dorregaray feels obligated to something quite the opposite. Yennefer by virtue of certain changes which her body was subjected to cannot fulfil her wishes and is terribly undecided. Dammit only the Reavers and the dwarves dont feel a calling and simply want to line their pockets. Perhaps thats why Im so drawn to them?
You arent drawn to them Geralt of Rivia. Im neither blind nor deaf. It wasnt at the sound of their name you pulled out that pouch. But I surmise…
Theres no need to surmise the Witcher said without anger.
I apologise.
Theres no need to apologise.
They reined back their horses just in time in order not to ride into the column of bowmen from Caingorn which had suddenly been called to a halt.
What has happened? Geralt stood up in his stirrups. Why have we stopped?
I dont know. Borch turned his head away. Véa her face strangely contorted uttered a few quick words.
Ill ride up to the front the Witcher said to see whats going on.
Stay here.
Why?
Three Jackdaws was silent for a moment eyes fixed on the ground.
Why? Geralt repeated.
Go Borch said. Perhaps itll be better that way.
Whatll be better?
Go.
The bridge connecting the two edges of the chasm looked sound. It was built from thick pine timbers and supported on a quadrangular pier against which the current crashed and roared in long strands of foam.
Hey Beanpole! yelled Boholt who was driving the wagon. Whyve you stopped?
I dont know if the bridge will hold.
Why are we taking this road? Gyllenstiern asked riding over. Its not to my liking to take the wagons across the bridge. Hey cobbler! Why are you leading us this way and not by the trail? The trail continues on towards the west doesnt it?
The heroic poisoner of Barefield approached removing his sheepskin cap. He looked ridiculous dressed up in an old-fashioned half-armour probably hammered out during the reign of King Sambuk pulled down tightly over a shepherds smock.
The roads shorter this way Your Majesty he said not to the chancellor but directly to Niedamir whose face still expressed thoroughly excruciated boredom.
How is that? Gyllenstiern asked frowning. Niedamir did not even grace the cobbler with a more attentive glance.
Thems Sheepbagger said indicating the three notched peaks towering over the surrounding area is Chiava Great Kestrel and Harbingers Fang. The trail leads toward the ruins of the old stronghold and skirts around Chiava from the north beyond the rivers source. But we can shorten the way by takin the bridge. Well pass through the gorge and onto the plain tween the mountains. And if we dont find no sign of the dragon there well continue on eastwards well search the ravines. And even further eastward there are flat pastures where theres a straight road to Caingorn towards your lands sire.
And where Sheepbagger did you acquire such knowledge about these mountains? Boholt asked. At your cobblers last?
No sir. I herded sheep here as a young un.
And that bridge wont give way? Boholt stood up on the box and looked downwards at the foaming river. That must be a drop of forty fathoms.
Itll old sir.
Whats a bridge doing in this wilderness anyhow?
That there bridge Sheepbagger said was built by trolls in the olden days and whoever came this way had to pay them a pretty penny. But since folk seldom came this way the trolls were reduced to beggary. But the bridge remains.
I repeat Gyllenstiern said irately. We have wagons with tackle and provender and we may become bogged down in the wilderness. Is it not better to take the trail?
We could take the trail the cobbler shrugged but its longer that way. And the king said ed give is earteeth to get to that dragon soon.
Eyeteeth the chancellor corrected him.
Have it your way eyeteeth Sheepbagger agreed. But its still quicker by the bridge.
Right lets go Sheepbagger Boholt decided. Forge ahead you and your men. We have a custom of letting the most valiant through first.
No more than one wagon at a time Gyllenstiern warned.
Right Boholt lashed his horses and the wagon rumbled onto the bridges timbers. Follow us Beanpole! Make sure the wheels are rolling smoothly!
Geralt reined back his horse his way barred by Niedamirs bowmen in their purple and gold tunics crowded on the stone bridgehead.
The Witchers mare snorted.
The earth shuddered. The mountains trembled the jagged edge of the rock wall beside them became blurred against the sky and the wall itself suddenly spoke with a dull but audible rumbling.
Look out! Boholt yelled now on the other side of the bridge. Look out there!
The first small stones pattered and rattled down the spasmodically shuddering rock wall. Geralt watched as part of the road they had followed very rapidly widening into a yawning black crack broke off and plunged into the chasm with a thunderous clatter.
To horse! Gyllenstiern yelled. Your Majesty! To the other side!
Niedamir head buried in his horses mane charged onto the bridge and Gyllenstiern and several bowmen leapt after him. Behind them the royal wagon with its flapping gryphon banner rumbled onto the creaking timbers.
Its a landslide! Get out of the way! Yarpen Zigrin bellowed from behind lashing his horses rumps overtaking Niedamirs second wagon and jostling the bowmen. Out of the way Witcher! Out of the way!
Eyck of Denesle stiff and erect galloped beside the dwarves wagon. Were it not for his deathly pale face and mouth contorted in a quivering grimace one might have thought the knight errant had not noticed the stones and boulders falling onto the trail. Further back someone in the group of bowmen screamed wildly and horses whinnied.
Geralt tugged at the reins and spurred his horse as right in front of him the earth boiled from the boulders cascading down. The dwarves wagon rattled over the stones. Just before the bridge it jumped up and landed with a crack on its side onto a broken axle. A wheel bounced off the railing and plunged downwards into the spume.
The Witchers mare lacerated by sharp shards of stone reared up. Geralt tried to dismount but caught his boot buckle in the stirrup and fell to the side onto the trail. His mare neighed and dashed ahead straight towards the bridge dancing over the chasm. The dwarves ran across the bridge yelling and cursing.
Hurry Geralt! Dandelion yelled running behind him and looking back.
Jump on Witcher! Dorregaray called threshing about in the saddle struggling to control his terrified horse.
Further back behind them the entire road was engulfed in a cloud of dust stirred up by falling rocks shattering Niedamirs wagons. The Witcher seized the straps of the sorcerers saddle bags. He heard a cry.
Yennefer had fallen with her horse rolled to the side away from the wildly kicking hooves and flattened herself to the ground shielding her head with her arms. The Witcher let go of the saddle ran towards her diving into the deluge of stones and leaping across the rift opening under his feet. Yennefer yanked by the arm got up onto her knees. Her eyes were wide open and the trickle of blood running down from her cut brow had already reached her ear.
Stand up Yen!
Geralt! Look out!
An enormous flat block of stone scraping against the side of the rock wall with a grinding clattering sound slid down and plummeted towards them. Geralt dropped shielding the sorcereress with his body. At the very same moment the block exploded bursting into a billion fragments which rained down on them stinging like wasps.
Quick! Dorregaray cried. Brandishing his wand atop the skittering horse he blasted more boulders which were tumbling down from the cliff into dust. Onto the bridge Witcher!
Yennefer waved a hand bending her fingers and shrieking incomprehensibly. As the stones came into contact with the bluish hemisphere which had suddenly materialised above their heads they vaporised like drops of water falling on red-hot metal.
Onto the bridge Geralt! the sorceress yelled. Stay close to me! They ran following Dorregaray and several fleeing bowmen. The bridge rocked and creaked the timbers bending in all directions as it flung them from railing to railing.
Quick!
The bridge suddenly slumped with a piercing penetrating crack and the half they had just crossed broke off tumbling with a clatter into the gulf taking the dwarves wagon with it which shattered against the rocky teeth to the sound of the horses frantic whinnying. The part they were now standing on was still intact but Geralt suddenly realised they were now running upwards across a rapidly tilting slope. Yennefer panted a curse.
Get down Yen! Hang on!
The rest of the bridge grated cracked and sagged into a ramp. They fell with it digging their fingers into the cracks between the timbers. Yennefer could not hold on. She squealed like a little girl and dropped. Geralt hanging on with one hand drew a dagger plunged the blade between the timbers and seized the haft in both hands. His elbow joints creaked as Yennefer tugged him down suspended by the belt and scabbard slung across his back. The bridge made a cracking noise again and tilted even more almost vertically.
Yen the Witcher grunted. Do something… Cast a bloody spell!
How can I? he heard a furious muffled snarl. Im hanging on!
Free one of your hands!
I cant…
Hey! Dandelion yelled from above. Can you hold on? Hey!
Geralt did not deign to reply.
Throw down a rope! Dandelion bellowed. Quickly dammit!
The Reavers the dwarves and Gyllenstiern appeared beside the troubadour. Geralt heard Boholts quiet words.
Wait busker. Shell soon fall. Then well pull the Witcher up.
Yennefer hissed like a viper writhing and suspended from Geralts back. His belt dug painfully into his chest.
Yen? Can you find a hold? Using your legs? Can you do anything with your legs?
Yes she groaned. Swing them around.
Geralt looked down at the river seething and swirling among the sharp rocks against which some bridge timbers a horse and a body in the bright colours of Caingorn were bumping. Beyond the rocks in the emerald transparent maelstrom he saw the tapered bodies of large trout languidly moving in the current.
Can you hold on Yen?
Just about… yes…
Heave yourself up. You have to get a foothold…
I… cant…
Throw down a rope! Dandelion yelled. Have you all gone mad? Theyll both fall!
Perhaps thats not so bad? Gyllenstiern wondered out of sight.
The bridge creaked and sagged even more. Geralts fingers gripping the hilt of his dagger began to go numb.
Yen…
Shut up… and stop wriggling about…
Yen?
Dont call me that…
Can you hold on?
No she said coldly. She was no longer struggling but simply hanging from his back; a lifeless inert weight.
Yen?
Shut up.
Yen. Forgive me.
No. Never.
Something crept downwards over the timbers. Swiftly. Like a snake. A rope emanating with a cold glow twisting and curling as though alive searched for and found Geralts neck with its moving tip slid under his armpits and ravelled itself into a loose knot. The sorceress beneath him moaned sucking in air. He was certain she would start sobbing. He was mistaken.
Careful! Dandelion shouted from above. Were pulling you up! Gar! Kennet! Pull them up! Heave!
A tug the painful constricting tension of the taut rope. Yennefer sighed heavily. They quickly travelled upwards bellies scraping against the coarse timbers.
At the top Yennefer was the first to stand up.
We saved but one wagon from the entire caravan Your Majesty Gyllenstiern said not counting the Reavers wagon. Seven bowmen remain from the troop. Theres no longer a road on the far side of the chasm just scree and a smooth wall as far as the breach permits one to look. We know not if anyone survived of those who remained when the bridge collapsed.
Niedamir did not answer. Eyck of Denesle standing erect stood before the king staring at him with shining feverish eyes.
The ire of the gods is hounding us he said raising his arms. We have sinned King Niedamir. It was a sacred expedition an expedition against evil. For the dragon is evil yes each dragon is evil incarnate. I do not pass by evil indifferently I crush it beneath my foot… Annihilate it. Just as the gods and the Holy Book demand.
What is he drivelling on about? Boholt asked frowning.
I dont know Geralt said adjusting his mares harness. I didnt understand a single word.
Be quiet Dandelion said Im trying to remember it perhaps Ill be able to use it if I can get it to rhyme.
The Holy Book says Eyck said now yelling loudly that the serpent the foul dragon with seven heads and ten horns will come forth from the abyss! And on his back will sit a woman in purple and scarlet and a golden goblet will be in her hand and on her forehead will be written the sign of all and ultimate whoredom!
I know her! Dandelion said delighted. Its Cilia the wife of the Alderman of Sommerhalder!
Quieten down poet sir Gyllenstiern said. And you O knight from Denesle speak more plainly if you would.
One should act against evil O King Eyck called with a pure heart and conscience with head raised! But who do we see here? Dwarves who are pagans are born in the darkness and bow down before dark forces! Blasphemous sorcerers usurping divine laws powers and privileges! A witcher who is an odious aberration an accursed unnatural creature. Are you surprised that a punishment has befallen us? King Niedamir! We have reached the limits of possibility! Divine grace is being sorely tested. I call you king to purge the filth from our ranks before—
Not a word about me Dandelion interjected woefully. Not a mention of poets. And I try so hard.
Geralt smiled at Yarpen Zigrin who with slow movements was stroking the blade of his battle-axe which was stuck into his belt. The dwarf amused grinned. Yennefer turned away ostentatiously pretending that her skirt torn up to her hip distressed her more than Eycks words.
I think you were exaggerating a little Sir Eyck Dorregaray said sharply although no doubt for noble reasons. I regard the making known of your views about sorcerers dwarves and witchers as quite unnecessary. Although I think we have all become accustomed to such opinions it is neither polite nor chivalrous Sir Eyck. And it is utterly incomprehensible after you and no one else ran and used a magical elven rope to save a witcher and a sorceress whose lives were in danger. I conclude from what you say that you should rather have been praying for them to fall.
Dammit Geralt whispered to Dandelion. Did he throw us that rope? Eyck? Not Dorregaray?
No the bard muttered. Eyck it was indeed.
Geralt shook his head in disbelief. Yennefer cursed under her breath and straightened up.
Sir Eyck she said with a smile that anyone other than Geralt might have taken as pleasant and friendly. Why was that? Im blasphemous but you save my life?
You are a lady Madam Yennefer the knight bowed stiffly. And your comely and honest face permits me to believe that you will one day renounce this accursed sorcery.
Boholt snorted.
I thank you sir knight Yennefer said dryly and the Witcher Geralt also thanks you. Thank him Geralt.
Id rather drop dead the Witcher sighed disarmingly frank. What exactly should I thank him for? Im an odious aberration and my uncomely face does not augur any hope for an improvement. Sir Eyck hauled me out of the chasm by accident simply because I was tightly clutching the comely damsel. Had I been hanging there alone Eyck would not have lifted a finger. Im not mistaken am I sir knight?
You are mistaken Geralt sir the knight errant replied calmly. I never refuse anybody in need of help. Even a witcher.
Thank him Geralt. And apologise the sorceress said sharply otherwise you will be confirming that at least with regard to you Eyck was quite right. You are unable to coexist with people. Because you are different. Your participation in this expedition is a mistake. A nonsensical purpose brought you here. Thus it would be sensible to leave the party. I think you understand that now. And if not its time you did.
What purpose are you talking about madam? Gyllenstiern cut in. The sorceress looked at him but did not answer. Dandelion and Yarpen Zigrin smiled meaningfully at each other but so that the sorceress would not notice.
The Witcher looked into Yennefers eyes. They were cold.
I apologise and thank you O knight of Denesle he bowed. I thank everybody here present. For the swift rescue offered at once. I heard as I hung there how you were all raring to help. I ask everybody here present for forgiveness. With the exception of the noble Yennefer whom I thank but ask for nothing. Farewell. The dregs leave the company of their own free will. Because these dregs have had enough of you. Goodbye Dandelion.
Hey Geralt Boholt called dont pout like a maiden dont make a mountain out of a molehill. To hell with—
Look out everyoooone!
Sheepbagger and several members of the Barefield constabulary who had been sent ahead to reconnoitre were running back from the narrow opening to the gorge.
What is it? Whys he bellowing like that? Gar lifted his head up.
Good people… Your… Excellencies… the cobbler panted.
Get it out man Gyllenstiern said hooking his thumbs into his golden belt.
A dragon! Theres a dragon there!
Where?
Beyond the gorge… On level ground… Sire he…
To horse! Gyllenstiern ordered.
Gar! Boholt yelled onto the wagon! Beanpole get mounted and follow me!
Look lively lads! Yarpen Zigrin roared. Look lively by thunder!
Hey wait for me! Dandelion slung his lute over his shoulder. Geralt! Take me with you!
Jump on!
The gorge ended in a mound of light-coloured rocks which gradually thinned out creating an irregular ring. Beyond them the ground descended gently into a grassy undulating mountain pasture enclosed on all sides by limestone walls gaping with thousands of openings. Three narrow canyons the mouths of dried-up streams opened out onto the pasture.
Boholt the first to gallop to the barrier of rocks suddenly reined in his horse and stood up in his stirrups.
Oh hell he said. Oh bloody hell. It… it cant be!
What? Dorregaray asked riding up. Beside him Yennefer dismounting from the Reavers wagon pressed her chest against the rocky block peeped out moved back and rubbed her eyes.
What? What is it? Dandelion shouted leaning out from behind Geralts back. What is it Boholt?
That dragon… is golden.
No further than a hundred paces from the gorges rocky entrance from which they had emerged on the road to the northward-leading canyon on a gently curving low hill sat the creature. It was sitting arching its long slender neck in a smooth curve inclining its narrow head onto its domed chest wrapping its tail around its extended front feet.
There was something inexpressibly graceful in the creature and the way it was sitting; something feline something that contradicted its clearly reptilian origins. But it was also undeniably reptilian. For the creature was covered in distinctly outlined scales which shone with a glaring blaze of bright yellow gold. For the creature sitting on the hillock was golden; golden from the tips of its talons dug into the ground to the end of its long tail which was moving very gently among the thistles growing on the hill. Looking at them with its large golden eyes the creature unfurled its broad golden bat-like wings and remained motionless demanding to be admired.
A golden dragon Dorregaray whispered. Its impossible… A living fable!
Theres no such thing as a bloody golden dragon Gar pronounced and spat. I know what Im talking about.
Then whats sitting on that hillock? Dandelion asked pointedly.
Its some kind of trickery.
An illusion.
It is not an illusion Yennefer said.
Its a golden dragon Gyllenstiern said. An absolutely genuine golden dragon.
Golden dragons only exist in fables!
Stop that all of you Boholt suddenly broke in. Theres no point getting worked up. Any blockhead can see its a golden dragon. And what difference does it make my lords if its golden lapis lazuli shit-coloured or chequered? Its not that big well sort it out in no time. Beanpole Gar clear the debris off the wagon and get the gear out. Whats the difference if its golden or not?
There is a difference Boholt Beanpole said. And a vital one. That isnt the dragon were stalking. Not the one that was poisoned outside Barefield which is now sitting in its cave on a pile of ore and jewels. That ones just sitting on its arse. What bloody use is it to us?
That dragon is golden Kennet Yarpen Zigrin snarled. Have you ever seen anything like it? Dont you understand? Well get more for its hide than we would for a normal treasure hoard.
And without flooding the market with precious stones Yennefer added smiling unpleasantly. Yarpens right. The agreement is still binding. Quite something to divide up isnt it?
Hey Boholt? Gar shouted from the wagon where he was clattering amongst the tackle. What shall we equip ourselves and the horses with? What could that golden reptile belch hey? Fire? Acid? Steam?
Havent got an effing clue Boholt said sounding worried. Hey sorcerers! Anything in the fables about golden dragons about how to kill them?
How do you kill them? The usual way! Sheepbagger suddenly shouted. No point pondering give us an animal. Well stuff it full of something poisonous and feed it to the reptile and good riddance.
Dorregaray looked askance at the cobbler Boholt spat and Dandelion turned his head away with a grimace of disgust. Yarpen Zigrin smiled repulsively hands on hips.
Wha you looking at? Sheepbagger asked. Lets get to work we have to decide what to stuff the carcass with so the reptile quickly perishes. It as to be something which is extremely toxic poisonous or rotten.
Aha the dwarf spoke still smiling. Well whats poisonous foul and stinks? Do you know what Sheepbagger? Looks like its you.
What?
You bloody heard. Get lost bodger out of my sight.
Lord Dorregaray Boholt said walking over to the sorcerer. Make yourself useful. Call to mind some fables and tales. What do you know about golden dragons?
The sorcerer smiled straightening up self-importantly.
What do I know about golden dragons you ask? Not much but enough.
Were listening.
Then listen and listen attentively. Over there before us sits a golden dragon. A living legend possibly the last and only creature of its kind to have survived your murderous frenzy. One doesnt kill legends. I Dorregaray will not allow you to touch that dragon. Is that understood? You can get packed fasten your saddlebags and go home.
Geralt was convinced an uproar would ensue. He was mistaken.
Noble sorcerer sir Gyllenstierns voice interrupted the silence. Heed what and to whom you speak. King Niedamir may order you Dorregaray to fasten your saddlebags and go to hell. But not the other way around. Is that clear?
No the sorcerer said proudly it is not. For I am Master Dorregaray and will not be ordered around by someone whose kingdom encompasses an area visible from the height of the palisade on a mangy filthy stinking stronghold. Do you know Lord Gyllenstiern that were I to speak a charm and wave my hand you would change into a cowpat and your underage king into something ineffably worse? Is that clear?
Gyllenstiern did not manage to answer for Boholt walked up to Dorregaray caught him by the shoulder and pulled him around to face him. Gar and Beanpole silent and grim appeared from behind Boholt.
Just listen magician sir the enormous Reaver said. Before you wave that hand listen to me. I could spend a long time explaining what I would do with your prohibitions your fables and your foolish chatter. But I have no wish to. Let this suffice as my answer.
Boholt placed a finger against his nose and from a short distance ejected the contents onto the toes of the sorcerers boots.
Dorregaray blanched but did not move. He saw–as everyone did–the morning star mace on a cubit-long shaft hanging low at Gars side. He knew–as everyone did–that the time he needed to cast a spell was incomparably longer than the time Gar needed to smash his head to pieces.
Very well Boholt said. And now move nicely out of the way your lordship. And should the desire to open your gob occur to you quickly shove a bunch of grass into it. Because if I hear you whining again Ill give you something to remember me by.
Boholt turned away and rubbed his hands.
Right Gar Beanpole lets get to work because that reptile wont hang around forever.
Doesnt seem to be planning on going anywhere Dandelion said looking at the foreground. Look at it.
The golden dragon on the hill yawned lifted its head waved its wings and lashed the ground with its tail.
King Niedamir and you knights! it yelled with a roar like a brass trumpet. I am the dragon Villentretenmerth! As I see the landslide which I–though I say it as shouldnt–sent down on your heads did not completely stop you. You have come this far. As you know there are only three ways out of this valley. East towards Barefield and west towards Caingorn. And you may use those roads. You will not take the northern gorge gentlemen because I Villentretenmerth forbid you. However if anyone does not wish to respect my injunction I challenge him to fight an honourable knightly duel. With conventional weapons without spells without breathing fire. A fight to the utter capitulation of one of the sides. I await an answer through your herald as custom dictates!
Everyone stood with their mouths open wide.
It can talk! Boholt panted. Remarkable!
Not only that but very intelligently Yarpen Zigrin said. Anyone know what a confessional weapon is?
An ordinary non-magical one Yennefer said frowning. But something else puzzles me. With a forked tongue its not capable of articulated speech. The rogue is using telepathy! Be careful it works in both directions. It can read your thoughts.
Has it gone completely barmy or what? Kennet Beanpole said annoyed. An honourable duel? With a stupid reptile? Not a chance! Well attack him together! Theres strength in numbers!
No.
They looked around.
Eyck of Denesle already mounted in full armour with his lance set by his stirrup looked much better than he had on foot. His feverish eyes blazed from beneath his raised visor and his face was pale.
No Kennet sir the knight repeated. Unless it is over my dead body. I will not permit knightly honour to be insulted in my presence. Whomsoever dares to violate the principles of this honourable duel…
Eyck was talking louder and louder. His exalted voice was cracking and he was trembling with excitement.
… whomsoever affronts honour also affronts me and his or my blood will be shed on this tired earth. The beast calls for a duel? Very well! Let the herald trumpet my name! May divine judgement decide! On the dragons side is the power of fang and talon and infernal fury and on my side…
What a moron Yarpen Zigrin muttered. … on my side righteousness faith the tears of virgins whom this reptile—
Thats enough Eyck you make me want to puke! Boholt yelled. Go on to the lists! Dont talk set about that dragon!
Hey Boholt wait one of the dwarves tugging on his beard suddenly said. Forgotten about the agreement? If Eyck lays low the serpent hell take half…
Eyck wont take anything Boholt grinned. I know him. Hell be happy if Dandelion writes a song about him.
Silence! Gyllenstiern declared. Let it be. Against the dragon will ride out the virtuous knight errant Eyck of Denesle fighting in the colours of Caingorn as the lance and sword of King Niedamir. That is the kingly will!
There you have it Yarpen Zigrin gnashed his teeth. The lance and sword of Niedamir. The Caingorn kinglet has fixed us. What now?
Nothing Boholt spat. I reckon you dont want to cross Eyck Yarpen? He talks nonsense but if hes already mounted his horse and roused himself better get out of his way. Let him go dammit and sort the dragon out. And then well see.
Who shall be the herald? Dandelion asked. The dragon wanted a herald. Maybe me?
No. We dont need a song Dandelion Boholt frowned. Yarpen Zigrin can be the herald. Hes got a voice like a bull.
Very well no bother Yarpen said. Bring me a flag-bearer with a banner so that everything is as it should be.
Just talk politely dwarf sir. And courteously Gyllenstiern cautioned.
Dont learn me how to talk the dwarf proudly stuck out his belly. I was sent on diplomatic missions when you lot were still knee-high to a grasshopper.
The dragon continued to sit patiently on the hillock waving its tail cheerfully. The dwarf clambered up onto the largest boulder hawked and spat.
Hey you there! he yelled putting his hands on his hips. You fucking dragon you! Listen to what the herald has to say! That means me! The first one to take you on honourably will be the meandering knight Eyck of Denesle! And he will stick his lance in your paunch according to the holy custom to your confusion and to the joy of poor virgins and King Niedamir! It will be a fair fight and honourable breathing fire is not allowed and you may only lambast the other confessionally until the other gives up the ghost or expires! Which we sincerely wish on you! Understood dragon?
The dragon yawned flapped its wings and then flattening itself to the ground quickly descended from the hillock to level ground.
I have understood noble herald! it yelled back. Then may the virtuous Eyck of Denesle enter the fray. I am ready!
What a pantomime Boholt spat following Eyck with a grim expression as he walked his horse over the barrier of boulders. A ruddy barrel of laughs…
Shut your yap Boholt Dandelion shouted rubbing his hands. Look Eyck is preparing to charge! Itll be a bloody beautiful ballad!
Hurrah! Long live Eyck! someone shouted from Niedamirs troop of bowmen.
And I Sheepbagger said gloomily would still have stuffed him full of brimstone just to be certain.
Eyck already in the field saluted the dragon with his upraised lance slammed down his visor and struck his horse with his spurs.
Well well the dwarf said. He may be stupid but he knows how to charge. Look at him go!
Eyck lent forward braced in the saddle lowered his lance at full gallop. The dragon contrary to Geralts expectations did not leap aside did not move in a semicircle but flattened to the ground rushed straight at the attacking knight.
Hit him! Hit him Eyck! Yarpen yelled.
Eyck although in full gallop did not strike headlong straight ahead. At the last moment he nimbly changed direction shifting the lance over his horses head. Flashing past the dragon he thrust with all his might standing up in the stirrups. Everybody shouted in unison. Geralt did not join in with the choir.
The dragon evaded the blow with a delicate agile graceful turn and coiling like a living golden ribbon as quick as lightning but softly catlike reached a foot beneath the horses belly. The horse squealed jerking its croup high up and the knight rocked in the saddle but did not release his lance. Just as the horse was about to hit the ground snout first the dragon swept Eyck from the saddle with a fierce swipe of his clawed foot. Everybody saw his breastplate spinning upwards and everybody heard the clanking and thudding with which the knight fell onto the ground.
The dragon sitting on its haunches pinned the horse with a foot and lowered its toothy jaws. The horse squealed shrilly struggled and then was quiet.
In the silence that fell everybody heard the deep voice of the dragon Villentretenmerth.
The doughty Eyck of Denesle may now be taken from the battlefield for he is incapable of fighting any longer. Next please.
Oh fuck Yarpen Zigrin said in the silence that followed.
Both legs Yennefer said wiping her hands on a linen cloth and probably something with his spine. The armour on his back is dented as though hed been hit by a pile driver. He injured his legs with his own lance. He wont be mounting a horse for some time. If he ever mounts one again.
Professional hazard Geralt muttered. The sorceress frowned.
Is that all you have to say?
And what else would you like to hear Yennefer?
That dragon is unbelievably fast Geralt. Too fast for a man to fight it.
I understand. No Yen. Not me.
Principles the sorceress smiled spitefully or ordinary commonplace fear? The only human feeling that wasnt eradicated in you?
One and the other the Witcher agreed dispassionately. What difference does it make?
Precisely Yennefer came closer. None. Principles may be broken fear can be overcome. Kill that dragon Geralt. For me.
For you?
For me. I want that dragon Geralt. In one piece. I want to have him all for myself.
So cast a spell and kill it.
No. You kill it. And Ill use my spells to hold back the Reavers and the others so they dont interfere.
Youll kill them Yennefer.
Since when has that ever bothered you? You take care of the dragon Ill deal with the people.
Yennefer the Witcher said coldly I dont understand. What do you want with that dragon? Does the yellowness of its scales dazzle you to that degree? You dont suffer from poverty after all. You have numerous sources of income; youre famous. What are you about? Just dont talk about a calling I beg you.
Yennefer was silent then finally twisting her lips aimed a powerful kick at a stone lying in the grass.
Theres someone who can help me Geralt. Apparently its… you know what Im talking about… Apparently it isnt irreversible. Theres a chance. I could still have… Do you understand?
I do.
Its a complex operation costly. But in exchange for a golden dragon… Geralt?
The Witcher remained silent.
When we were hanging on the bridge the sorcereress said you asked me for something. Ill meet your request. In spite of everything.
The Witcher smiled sadly and touched the obsidian star on Yennefers neck with his index finger.
Its too late Yen. We arent hanging now. Its stopped mattering to me. In spite of everything.
He expected the worst: a cascade of fire lightning a smack in the face abuse curses. He was surprised just to see the suppressed trembling of her lips. Yennefer slowly turned away. Geralt regretted his words. He regretted the emotion which had engendered them. The limit of possibility overstepped now snapped like a lute string. He looked at Dandelion and saw the troubadour quickly turn his head away and avoid his gaze.
Well weve got the issue of knightly honour out of the way my lords Boholt called now dressed in armour and standing before Niedamir who was still sitting on a stone with an unvarying expression of boredom on his face. Knightly honour is lying there groaning softly. It was a lousy idea Lord Gyllenstiern to send out Eyck as your knight and vassal. I wouldnt dream of pointing the finger but I know whom Eyck can thank for his broken pins. Yes I swear weve killed two birds with one stone. One was a lunatic insanely reviving the legends of how a bold knight defeats a dragon in a duel. And the other a swindler who wanted to make money from it. Do you know who Im talking about Gyllenstiern what? Good. And now our move. Now the dragon is ours. Now we the Reavers will sort out that dragon. But by ourselves.
And the agreement Boholt? the chancellor drawled. What about the agreement?
I dont give a shit about the agreement.
This is outrageous! This is lese-majesty! Gyllenstiern stamped his foot. King Niedamir—
What about the king? Boholt yelled resting on an enormous two-handed sword. Perhaps the king will personally decide to take on the dragon by himself? Or perhaps you his faithful chancellor will squeeze your belly into a suit of armour and go into battle? Why not please do well wait my lord. You had your chance Gyllenstiern. Had Eyck mortally lanced the dragon you would have taken it in its entirety nothing would have been left to us because we hadnt helped not one golden scale on its back. But its too late now. Open your eyes. Theres no one to fight under Caingorns colours. You wont find another chump like Eyck.
Thats not true! the cobbler Sheepbagger said hurrying to the king who was still busy watching a point on the horizon of interest only to him. O King! Just wait a little and our men from Barefield will be arriving theyll be ere any moment! To hell with the cocksure nobility chase them away! Youll see who is really brave who is strong in deed and not just in word!
Shut your trap Boholt said calmly wiping a spot of rust from his breastplate. Shut your trap peasant because if you dont Ill shut it so hard Ill shove your teeth down your throat.
Sheepbagger seeing Kennet and Gar approaching quickly backed away and hid among the Barefield constables.
King! Gyllenstiern called. O King what do you command?
The expression of boredom suddenly vanished from Niedamirs face. The underage monarch wrinkled his freckly nose and stood up.
What do I command? he said in a shrill voice. Youve finally asked Gyllenstiern rather than decide for me and speak for me and on my behalf? Im very pleased. And may it thus remain Gyllenstiern. From this moment you will be silent and listen to my orders. Here is the first of them. Muster the men and order Eyck of Denesle be placed on a wagon. Were going back to Caingorn.
But sire—
Not a word Gyllenstiern. Madam Yennefer noble lords I bid you farewell. Ive lost some time on this expedition but have gained much. I have learned a great deal. Thank you for your words Madam Yennefer Master Dorregaray Sir Boholt. And thank you for your silence Sir Geralt.
O King Gyllenstiern said. What do you mean? The dragon is in our grasp. Its there for the taking. King your dream…
My dream Niedamir repeated pensively. I do not have it yet. And should I stay here… Then I might never have it.
But Malleore? And the hand of the princess? The chancellor waved his arms not giving up. And the throne? King the people there will acknowledge you as…
I dont give a shit about the people there as Sir Boholt would say Niedamir laughed. The throne of Malleore is mine anyway because in Caingorn I have three hundred armoured troops and fifteen hundred foot soldiers against their thousand crappy spearmen. Do they acknowledge me? They will have to. Ill keep hanging beheading and dismembering until they do. And their princess is a fat goose and to hell with her hand I only need her womb. Let her bear me an heir and then Ill poison her anyway. Using Master Sheepbaggers method. Thats enough chatter Gyllenstiern. Set about carrying out my orders.
Indeed Dandelion whispered to Geralt he has learned a great deal.
A great deal Geralt confirmed looking at the hillock where the golden dragon with its triangular head lowered was licking something grey-green sitting in the grass beside it with its forked scarlet tongue. But I wouldnt like to be his subject Dandelion.
And what do you think will happen now?
The Witcher looked calmly at the tiny grey-green creature fluttering its bat-like wings beside the golden talons of the stooping dragon.
And whats your opinion about all this Dandelion? What do you think?
What does it matter what I think? Im a poet Geralt. Does my opinion matter at all?
Yes it does.
Well Ill tell you then. When I see a reptile Geralt a viper lets say or some other serpent it gives me the creeps the vileness disgusts and terrifies me. But that dragon…
Yeah?
It… its pretty Geralt.
Thank you Dandelion.
What for?
Geralt turned his head away and with a slow movement reached for the buckle of his belt which crossed his chest diagonally and shortened it by two holes. He lifted his right hand to check if his sword hilt was positioned correctly. Dandelion looked on with eyes wide open.
Geralt! Do you plan to…?
Yes the Witcher said calmly there is a limit to what I can accept as possible. Ive had enough of all this. Are you going with Niedamir or staying Dandelion?
The troubadour leaned over placed his lute beneath a stone cautiously and with great care and then straightened up.
Im staying. What did you say? The limits of possibility? Im bagging that as the title of a ballad.
It could be your last one Dandelion.
Geralt?
Mm?
Dont kill it… Can you not?
A sword is a sword Dandelion. Once drawn…
Please try.
I will.
Dorregaray chuckled turned towards Yennefer and the Reavers and pointed at the receding royal caravan.
Over there he said King Niedamir is leaving. He no longer gives orders through Gyllenstierns mouth. He is departing having demonstrated good sense. Im glad youre here Dandelion. I suggest you begin composing a ballad.
What about?
About the sorcerer drew his wand from his coat Master Dorregaray sorcerer chasing back home the rabble who wanted to use vulgar methods to kill the last golden dragon left in the world. Dont move Boholt! Yarpen hands off your battle-axe! Dont move a muscle Yennefer! Off you go good-for-nothings follow the king like good little boys. Be off mount your horses or wagons. I warn you that if anybody makes a false move all that will remain of him will be a burning smell and a bit of fused sand. I am serious.
Dorregaray! Yennefer hissed.
My lord sorcerer Boholt said conciliatorily. Is this any way to act—
Be quiet Boholt. I told you not to touch that dragon. Fables are not to be killed. About-turn and scram.
Yennefers hand suddenly shot forward and the ground around Dorregaray exploded in blue flame seething in a dust cloud of torn turf and grit.
The sorcerer staggered encircled by fire. Gar leaped forward and struck him in the face with the heel of his hand. Dorregaray fell to the ground a bolt of red lightning shooting from his wand and harmlessly zapping out among the rocks. Beanpole sprang at him from the other side kicked the sorcerer to the ground and took a backswing to repeat the blow. Geralt fell among them pushed Beanpole away drew his sword and thrust flat aiming between the breastplate and the spaulder. He was thwarted by Boholt who parried the blow with the broad blade of his two-handed sword. Dandelion tried to trip Gar but ineffectively; Gar clung to the bards rainbow-hued jerkin and thumped him between the eyes with his fist. Yarpen Zigrin leaping from behind tripped Dandelion hitting him behind his knees with the haft of a hatchet.
Geralt spun into a pirouette evading Boholts sword and jabbed at the onrushing Beanpole tearing off his iron bracer. Beanpole leaped back tripped and fell over. Boholt grunted and whirled his sword like a scythe. Geralt jumped over the whistling blade slammed the hilt of his sword into Boholts breastplate fended him off and thrust aiming for his cheek. Boholt realising he could not parry with his heavy sword threw himself backwards falling on his back. The Witcher leaped at him and at that moment felt the earth fall away from under his rapidly numbing feet. He saw the horizon going from horizontal to vertical. Vainly trying to form a protective Sign with his fingers he fell heavily onto the ground on his side his sword slipping from his numb hand. There was a pounding and a buzzing in his ears.
Tie them up before the spell stops working Yennefer said somewhere above and very far away. All three of them.
Dorregaray and Geralt befuddled and paralysed allowed themselves to be bound and tethered to a wagon silently and without resisting. Dandelion fought and cursed so he received a punch in the face before he was tied to the wagon.
Why tie em up traitors sons of dogs? Sheepbagger said walking over. They should be clubbed to death at once and be done with it.
Youre a son yourself and not a dogs Yarpen Zigrin said Dont insult dogs here. Scram you heel.
Youre awfully brave Sheepbagger snapped. Well see if youre brave enough when my comrades arrive from Barefield. Theyll be here any moment. Youll…
Yarpen twisting with surprising agility considering his build whacked Sheepbagger over the head with his hatchet. Gar standing alongside gave him a kick for good measure. Sheepbagger flew a few feet through the air and fell nose-first in the grass.
Youll be sorry! he yelled crawling on all fours. Ill fix…
Lads! Yarpen Zigrin roared. Kick the cobbler in the cobblers! Grab im Gar!
Sheepbagger did not wait. He sprang up and dashed towards the eastern canyon. The Barefield trackers followed him cringing. The dwarves cackling sent a hail of stones after them.
The airs freshened up already Yarpen laughed. Right Boholt lets get down to the dragon.
Hold on Yennefer raised a hand. The only thing youre getting down to is the bottom of the valley. Be gone all of you.
Excuse me? Boholt bent over his eyes blazing ominously. What did you say Most Honourable Madam Witch?
Follow that cobbler Yennefer repeated. All of you. Ill deal with the dragon myself. Using unconventional weapons. And you can thank me as you leave. Had it not been for me you would have tasted the Witchers sword. Come now quickly Boholt before I lose my temper. I warn you that I know a spell which can make you all geldings. I just have to raise my hand.
Is that so? Boholt drawled. My patience has reached its limits. I wont be made a fool of. Beanpole unhook the shaft from the cart. I feel Ill also be needing unconventional weapons. Someone is soon going to get a damn good thrashing my lords. I wont point the finger but a certain hideous witch is going to get a bloody sound hiding.
Just try Boholt. Youll brighten up my day.
Why Yennefer? the dwarf asked reproachfully.
Perhaps I simply dont like sharing Yarpen?
Well now Yarpen Zigrin smiled. Thats profoundly human. So human its almost dwarven. Its nice to see familiar qualities in a sorceress. Because I dont like sharing either Yennefer.
He hunched into a short very rapid backswing. A steel ball appearing out of his pocket as if from nowhere whirred through the air and smacked Yennefer right in the forehead. Before the sorceress had time to come to her senses she was suspended in the air being held up by Beanpole and Gar and Yarpen was binding her ankles with twine. Yennefer screamed furiously but one of Yarpens boys threw the wagons reins over her head from behind and pulled them tight the leather strap digging into her open mouth stifling her cries.
Well Yennefer Boholt said as he walked over how do you plan to turn me into a gelding now? When you cant move a hand?
He tore the collar of her coat and then ripped and wrenched open her blouse. Yennefer shrieked choked by the reins.
I dont have the time now Boholt said groping her shamelessly to the cackling of the dwarves but wait a little while witch. Once weve sorted out the dragon well make merry. Tie her firmly to the wheel boys. Both little hands to the rim so she wont be able to lift a finger. And no ones to bloody touch her yet my lords. Well sort the order out depending on who does a good job on the dragon.
Beware Boholt Geralt arms tied said softly calmly and ominously. Ill follow you to the ends of the world.
You surprise me the Reaver replied just as calmly. In your place Id keep mum. I know you and I know I have to take your threat seriously. I wont have a choice. You might not come out of this alive Witcher. Well return to this matter. Gar Beanpole to horse.
What bad luck Dandelion snapped. Why the hell did I get mixed up in this?
Dorregaray lowering his head watched the thick drops of blood slowly dripping from his nose onto his belly.
Would you stop staring! the sorceress screamed at Geralt. She was writhing like a snake in her bonds vainly trying to conceal her exposed charms. The Witcher obediently turned his head away. Dandelion did not.
You must have used an entire barrel of mandrake elixir on what I can see Yennefer the bard laughed. Your skins like a sixteen-year-olds dammit.
Shut your trap whores son! the sorceress bellowed.
How old are you actually Yennefer? Dandelion asked not giving up. Two hundred? Well a hundred and fifty lets say. And youre behaving like…
Yennefer twisted her neck and spat at him but was wide of the mark.
Yen the Witcher said reproachfully wiping his spit-covered ear on his shoulder.
I wish he would stop staring!
Not on your life Dandelion said without taking his eyes off the bedraggled sorceress. Im here because of her. They may slit our throats but at least Ill die happy.
Shut up Dandelion the Witcher said.
I have no intention of so doing. In fact I plan to compose the Ballad of the Two Tits. Please dont interfere.
Dandelion Dorregaray sniffed through his bloody nose. Be serious.
I am being bloody serious.
The dwarves heaved Boholt up into the saddle. He was heavy and squat from the armour and the leather pads he was wearing. Gar and Beanpole were already mounted holding huge two-handed swords across their saddles.
Right Boholt rasped lets have at him.
Oh no said a deep voice sounding like a brass trumpet. I have come to you!
From beyond the ring of boulders emerged a long snout shimmering with gold a slender neck armed with a row of triangular serrated projections and behind taloned feet. The evil reptilian eyes with their vertical pupils peered from beneath horned eyelids.
I was tired of waiting in the open the dragon Villentretenmerth said looking around so I came myself. Fewer and fewer challengers I see.
Boholt held the reins in his teeth and a longsword two-handed.
Thas nuff he said indistinctly holding the strap in his teeth. Stah an fight heptile!
I am the dragon said arching its back and lifting its tail insultingly.
Boholt looked around. Gar and Beanpole slowly almost ostentatiously calmly flanked the dragon. Yarpen Zigrin and his boys waited behind holding battle-axes.
Aaaargh! Boholt roared striking his horse hard with his heels and lifting his sword.
The dragon curled up flattened itself to the ground and struck with its tail from above and behind like a scorpion hitting not Boholt but Gar who was attacking from the side. Gar fell over with his horse amid a clanking screaming and neighing tumult. Boholt charging at a gallop struck with a terrible blow but the dragon nimbly dodged the wide blade. The momentum of the gallop carried Boholt alongside the dragons body. The dragon twisted standing on its hind legs and clawed Beanpole tearing open his horses belly and the riders thigh with a single slash. Boholt leaning far out from the saddle managed to steer his horse around pulling the reins with his teeth and attacked once more.
The dragon lashed its tail over the dwarves rushing towards it knocking them all over and then lunged at Boholt en route–seemingly in passing–stamping vigorously on Beanpole who was trying to get up. Boholt jerking his head around tried to steer his galloping horse but the dragon was infinitely quicker and more agile. Cunningly stealing up on Boholt from the left in order to obstruct his swing it struck with a taloned foot. The horse reared up and lurched over to one side. Boholt flew from the saddle losing his sword and helmet tumbling backwards onto the ground banging his head against a rock.
Run for it lads! Up the hill! Yarpen Zigrin bellowed outshouting the screams of Gar who was pinned down by his horse. Beards fluttering the dwarves dashed towards the rocks at a speed that belied their short legs. The dragon did not give chase. It sat calmly and looked around. Gar was thrashing and screaming beneath the horse. Boholt lay motionless. Beanpole was crawling towards the rocks sideways like a huge iron crab.
Staggering Dorregaray whispered. Staggering…
Hey! Dandelion struggled in his bonds making the wagon shake. What is it? Over there! Look!
A great cloud of dust could be seen on the eastern side of the gorge and shouting rattling and the tramping of hooves quickly reached them. The dragon extended its neck to look.
Three large wagons full of armed men rolled onto the plain. Splitting up they began to surround the dragon.
Its… Dammit its the constabulary and guilds from Barefield! Dandelion called. They came around by the source of the Braa! Yes its them! Look its Sheepbagger there at the front!
The dragon lowered its head and gently pushed a small green-greyish mewling creature towards the wagon. Then it struck the ground with its tail roared loudly and shot like an arrow towards the encounter with the men of Barefield.
What is it? Yennefer asked That little thing? Crawling around in the grass? Geralt?
Its what the dragon was protecting from us the Witcher said. Thats what hatched some time ago in the cave over there in the northern canyon. Its the dragonling from the egg of the dragon that Sheepbagger poisoned.
The dragonling stumbling and dragging its bulging belly across the ground scurried unsteadily over to the wagon squealed stood on its hind legs stretched out its little wings and then without a seconds thought clung to the sorceresss side. Yennefer with an extremely queer look on her face sighed loudly.
It likes you Geralt murmured.
Hes young but he aint stupid Dandelion twisting in his fetters grinned. Look where hes stuck his snout. Id like to be in his shoes dammit. Hey little one run away! Thats Yennefer! Terror of dragons! And witchers. Well at least one witcher—
Quiet Dandelion Dorregaray shouted. Look over there on the battlefield! Theyve got him a pox on them!
The Barefield wagons rumbling like war chariots raced towards the attacking dragon.
Smack im! Sheepbagger yelled hanging on to the wagoners back. Smack im kinsmen anywhere and anyhow! Dont hold back!
The dragon nimbly eluded the first advancing wagon flashing with scythe blades forks and spears but ended up between the next two from which a huge double fishing net pulled by straps dropped onto it. The dragon fully enmeshed fell down rolled over curled up in a ball and spread its legs. The net tore to shreds with a sharp rending noise. More nets were thrown onto it from the first wagon which had managed to turn around this time utterly entangling the dragon. The two other wagons also turned back dashed towards the dragon rattling and bouncing over bumps.
Youre caught in the net you carp! Sheepbagger bawled. And well soon scale you!
The dragon roared and belched a cloud of steam into the sky. The Barefield constables rushed towards him spilling out of the wagons. The dragon bellowed again desperately with a thundering roar.
From the northern canyon came a reply a high-pitched battle cry.
Out from the gorge straining forward in a frenzied gallop blonde plaits streaming whistling piercingly surrounded by the flickering flashes of sabres charged…
The Zerrikanians! the Witcher shouted helplessly tugging at the ropes.
Oh shit! Dandelion chimed in. Geralt! Do you understand?
The Zerrikanians rode through the throng like hot knives through a barrel of butter scattering their path with massacred corpses and then leaped from their horses in full flight to stand beside the dragon struggling in the net. The first of the onrushing constables immediately lost his head. The second aimed a blow with his pitchfork at Véa but the Zerrikanian holding her sabre in both hands upside down with the tip pointing towards the ground slashed him open from crotch to sternum. The others beat a hurried retreat.
To the wagons! Sheepbagger yelled. To the wagons kinsmen! Well crush them under the wagons!
Geralt! Yennefer suddenly shouted pulling up her bound legs and pushing them with a sudden thrust under the wagon beneath the arms of the Witcher which were bound and twisted behind him. The Igni Sign! Make it! Can you feel the rope? Cast the bloody thing!
Without looking? Geralt groaned. Ill burn you Yen!
Make the Sign! I can take it!
He obeyed and felt a tingling in his fingers which were forming the Igni Sign just above the sorceresss bound ankles. Yennefer turned her head away biting down on her coat collar and stifling a moan. The dragonling squealing beat its wings beside her.
Yen!
Make it! she bellowed.
Her bonds gave way in an instant as the disgusting nauseating odour of charred skin became unbearable. Dorregaray uttered a strange noise and fainted suspended by his fetters from the wagon wheel.
The sorceress wincing with the pain straightened up lifting her now free leg. She screamed in a furious voice full of pain and rage. The medallion on Geralts neck jerked as though it were alive. Yennefer straightened her thigh waved her foot towards the charging wagons of the Barefield constabulary and shouted out a spell. The air crackled and gave off the smell of ozone.
O ye Gods Dandelion wailed in admiration. What a ballad this will be Yennefer!
The spell cast by her shapely little foot was not totally effective. The first wagon–and everything on it–took on the yellow colour of a kingcup which the Barefield soldiers in the frenzy of battle did not even notice. It did better with the second wagon whose entire crew were transformed into huge rough-skinned frogs which hopped around in all directions croaking comically. The wagon now bereft of a driver tipped over and fell apart. The horses neighing hysterically fled into the distance dragging the broken shaft behind them.
Yennefer bit her lip and waved her leg in the air again. The kingcup-yellow wagon suddenly dissolved into kingcup-yellow smoke to the sound of lively musical tones drifting down from above and its entire crew flopped onto the grass stupefied forming a picturesque heap. The wheels of the third wagon went from round to square and the result was instant. The horses reared up the wagon crashed over and the Barefield constabulary were tipped out and thrown onto the ground. Yennefer now driven by pure vindictiveness flourished a leg ferociously and yelled out a spell transforming the Barefielders randomly into turtles geese woodlice flamingos and stripy piglets. The Zerrikanians expertly and methodically finished off the rest.
The dragon having finally torn the nets to shreds leaped up flapped its wings roared and hurtled as straight as a ramrod after the unharmed and fleeing Sheepbagger. Sheepbagger was dashing like a stag but the dragon was faster. Geralt seeing the gaping jaws and razor-sharp flashing teeth turned his head away. He heard a gruesome scream and a revolting crunching sound. Dandelion gave a stifled shout. Yennefer her face as white as a sheet bent over double turned to one side and vomited under the wagon.
A silence fell interrupted only by the occasional gaggling croaking and squealing of the remains of the Barefield constabulary.
Véa smiling unpleasantly stood over Yennefer legs wide apart. The Zerrikanian raised her sabre. Yennefer pale raised a leg.
No said Borch also known as Three Jackdaws who was sitting on a stone. In his lap he was holding the dragonling peaceful and content.
We arent going to kill Madam Yennefer the dragon Villentretenmerth repeated. It is over. What is more we are grateful to Madam Yennefer for her invaluable assistance. Release them Véa.
Do you understand Geralt? Dandelion whispered chafing feeling into his numb arms. Do you understand? Theres an ancient ballad about a golden dragon. A golden dragon can…
Can assume any form it wishes Geralt muttered even that of a human. Ive heard that too. But I didnt believe it.
Yarpen Zigrin sir! Villentretenmerth called to the dwarf who was hanging onto a vertical rock twenty ells above the ground. What are you looking for there? Marmots? Not your favourite dish if memory serves me. Climb down and busy yourself with the Reavers. They need help. There wont be any more killing. Of anybody.
Dandelion casting anxious glances at the Zerrikanians who were vigilantly patrolling the battlefield was still trying to revive the unconscious Dorregaray. Geralt was dressing Yennefers scorched ankles and rubbing ointment into them. The sorceress was hissing with pain and mumbling spells.
Having completed his task the Witcher stood up.
Stay here he said. I have to talk to him.
Yennefer stood up wincing.
Im going with you Geralt she said linking her arm in his. May I? Please Geralt.
With me Yen? I thought…
Dont think she pressed herself against his arm.
Yen?
Its alright Geralt.
He looked into her eyes which were warm. As they used to be. He lowered his head and kissed her lips; hot soft and willing. As they used to be.
They walked over. Yennefer held up by Geralt curtsied low as though before a king holding her dress in her fingertips.
Three Jack… Villentretenmerth… the Witcher said.
My name when freely translated into your language means Three Black Birds the dragon said. The dragonling little claws digging into his forearm arched its back to be stroked.
Chaos and Order Villentretenmerth smiled. Do you remember Geralt? Chaos is aggression Order is protection against it. Its worth rushing to the ends of the world to oppose aggression and evil isnt it Witcher? Particularly as you said when the pay is fair. And this time it was. It was the treasure hoard of the she-dragon Myrgtabrakke the one poisoned outside Barefield. She summoned me to help her to stop the evil threatening her. Myrgtabrakke flew away soon after Eyck of Denesle was removed from the battlefield. She had sufficient time while you were talking and quarrelling. But she left me her treasure as my payment.
The dragonling squealed and flapped its little wings.
So you…
That is right the dragon interrupted. Well its the times we live in. For some time creatures which you usually call monsters have been feeling more and more under threat from people. They can no longer cope by themselves. They need a Defender. Some kind of… witcher.
And the destination… The goal at the end of the road?
This is it Villentretenmerth lifted his forearm. The dragon-ling squealed in alarm. Ive just attained it. Owing to him I shall survive Geralt of Rivia I shall prove there are no limits of possibility. One day you will also find such a purpose Witcher. Even those who are different can survive. Farewell Geralt. Farewell Yennefer.
The sorceress grasping the Witchers arm more firmly curtsied again.
Villentretenmerth stood up and looked at her and his expression was very serious.
Forgive me my frankness and forthrightness Yennefer. It is written all over your faces I dont even have to try to read your thoughts. You were made for each other you and the Witcher. But nothing will come of it. Nothing. Im sorry.
I know Yennefer blanched slightly. I know Villentretenmerth. But I would also like to believe there are no limits of possibility. Or at least I would like to believe that they are still very far away.
Véa walked over touched Geralts shoulder and quickly uttered a few words. The dragon laughed.
Geralt Véa says she will long remember the tub at the Pensive Dragon. She hopes well meet again some day.
What? Yennefer answered narrowing her eyes.
Nothing the Witcher said quickly Villentretenmerth…
Yes Geralt of Rivia?
You can assume any form. Any that you wish.
Indeed.
Why then a man? Why Borch with three black birds on his coat of arms?
The dragon smiled cheerfully.
I dont know Geralt in what circumstances the distant ancestors of our races encountered one another for the first time. But the fact is that for dragons there is nothing more repugnant than man. Man arouses instinctive irrational disgust in a dragon. With me its different. To me youre… likeable. Farewell.
It was not a gradual blurred transformation or a hazy pulsating trembling as with an illusion. It was as sudden as the blink of an eye. Where a second before had stood a curly-haired knight in a tunic decorated with three black birds now sat a golden dragon gracefully extending its long slender neck. Inclining its head the dragon spread its wings dazzlingly gold in the sunshine. Yennefer sighed loudly.
Véa already mounted beside Téa waved.
Véa the Witcher said you were right.
Hm?
He is the most beautiful.
The dead sheep swollen and bloated its stiff legs pointing towards the sky moved. Geralt crouching by the wall slowly drew his sword careful not to let the blade grate against the scabbard. Ten paces from him a pile of refuse suddenly arched up and heaved. The Witcher straightened and jumped before the wave of stench emanating from the disturbed midden reached him.
A tentacle ending in a rounded tapering protuberance bristling with spikes suddenly shot out from under the rubbish hurtling out towards him at incredible speed. The Witcher landed surely on the remains of a broken piece of furniture tottering on a pile of rotten vegetables swayed regained his balance and slashed the tentacle with a short blow of his sword cutting off the tentacular club. He sprang back at once but this time slipped from the boards and sank up to his thighs in the boggy midden.
The rubbish heap erupted throwing up viscous foul-smelling slime fragments of pots rotten rags and pale threads of sauerkraut and from beneath it all burst an enormous bulbous body as deformed as a grotesque potato lashing the air with three tentacles and the stump of a fourth.
Geralt trapped and immobilised struck with a broad twist of his hips smoothly hacking off another tentacle. The remaining two as thick as tree boughs fell on him with force plunging him more deeply into the waste. The body glided towards him ploughing into the midden like a barrel being dragged along. He saw the hideous bulbous shape snap open gaping with a wide maw full of large lumpish teeth.
He let the tentacles encircle his waist pull him with a squelch from the stinking slime and drag him towards the body now boring into the refuse heap with circular movements. The toothed maw snapped savagely and ferociously. Having been dragged close to the dreadful jaws the Witcher struck with his sword two-handed the blade biting smoothly and easily. The obnoxious sweetish odour took his breath away. The monster hissed and shuddered and the tentacles released their grip flapping convulsively in the air. Geralt bogged down in the refuse slashed again backhanded the blade repulsively crunching and grating on the bared teeth. The creature gurgled and drooped but immediately swelled hissing vomiting putrid slime over the Witcher. Keeping his balance with strenuous movements of his legs still stuck in the muck Geralt broke free and lunged forward cleaving the refuse with his chest like a swimmer moving through water and struck with all his strength from above powerfully bearing down on the blade as it cut into the body between the weakly glowing eyes. The monster groaned flapped around unfolding onto the pile of muck like a punctured bladder emitting palpable warm gusts of stench. The tentacles twitched and writhed among the rubbish.
The Witcher clambered out of the treacly slime and stood on slippery but hard ground. He felt something sticky and revolting which had got into his boot crawling over his calf. To the well he thought wash it off wash off all the repulsiveness as soon as possible. Wash myself. The creatures tentacles flapped on the refuse one last time sloppy and wet and then stopped moving.
A star fell a brief flash of lightning illuminating the black firmament flecked with unmoving dots of light. The Witcher made no wish.
He was breathing heavily wheezing and feeling the effects of the elixirs he had drunk before the fight wearing off. The gigantic heap of rubbish and waste piled up against the town walls descending steeply towards the glistening ribbon of the river looked pretty and alluring in the starlight. The Witcher spat.
The monster was dead now part of the midden where it had dwelled.
Another star fell. A garbage heap the Witcher said with effort. Muck filth and shit.
You reek Geralt Yennefer grimaced not turning from the mirror where she was cleaning off the colouring from her eyelids and eyelashes. Take a bath.
Theres no water he said looking into the tub.
We shall remedy that the sorceress stood up and threw the window open. Do you prefer sea water or fresh water?
Sea water for a change.
Yennefer spread her arms vigorously and shouted a spell making a brief intricate movement with her hands. Suddenly a sharp wet coldness blew in through the open window the shutters juddered and a green cloud gushed into the room with a hiss billowing in an irregular sphere. The tub foamed with water rippling turbulently banging against the edges and splashing onto the floor. The sorceress sat down and resumed her previously interrupted activity.
How did it go? she asked. What was it on the midden?
A zeugl as I suspected Geralt said pulling off his boots discarding his clothes and lowering a foot into the tub. Bloody hell Yen thats cold. Cant you heat the water?
No the sorceress moving her face towards the looking glass and instilling something into her eye using a thin glass rod. That spell is bloody wearying and makes me feel sick. And the cold will do you good after the elixirs.
Geralt did not argue. There was absolutely no point arguing with Yennefer.
Did the zeugl cause you any problems? The sorceress dipped the rod into a vial and dropped something into her other eye twisting her lips comically.
Not particularly.
From outside the open window there was a thud the sharp crack of wood breaking and an inarticulate voice tunelessly and incoherently repeating the chorus of a popular obscene song.
A zeugl said the sorceress as she reached for another vial from the impressive collection on the table and removed the cork from it. The fragrance of lilac and gooseberries filled the room. Well well. Even in a town its easy for a witcher to find work you dont have to roam through the wilds at all. You know Istredd maintains its becoming a general rule. The place of every creature from the forests and swamps that becomes extinct is occupied by something else some new mutation adapted to the artificial environment created by people.
As usual Geralt winced at the mention of Istredd. He was beginning to be sick of Yennefers admiration for Istredds brilliance. Even if Istredd was right.
Istredd is right Yennefer continued applying the lilac-and-gooseberry perfumed something to her cheeks and eyelids. Look for yourself; pseudorats in sewers and cellars zeugls in rubbish dumps neocorises in polluted moats and sewers taggirs in millponds. Its virtually symbiosis dont you think?
And ghouls in cemeteries devouring corpses the day after the funeral he thought rinsing off the soap. Total symbiosis.
Yes the sorceress put aside the vials and jars witchers can be kept busy in towns too. I think one day youll settle in a city for good Geralt.
Id rather drop dead he thought. But he did not say it aloud. Contradicting Yennefer as he knew inevitably led to a fight and a fight with Yennefer was not the safest thing.
Have you finished Geralt?
Yes.
Get out of the tub.
Without getting up Yennefer carelessly waved a hand and uttered a spell. The water from the tub–including everything which had spilled onto the floor or was dripping from Geralt–gathered itself with a swoosh into a translucent sphere and whistled through the window. He heard a loud splash.
A pox on you whoresons! an infuriated yell rang out from below. Have you nowhere to pour away your piss? I bloody hope youre eaten alive by lice catch the ruddy pox and croak!
The sorceress closed the window.
Dammit Yen the Witcher chuckled. You could have chucked the water somewhere else.
I could have she purred but I didnt feel like it.
She took the oil lamp from the table and walked over to him. The white nightdress clinging to her body as she moved made her tremendously appealing. More so than if she were naked he thought.
I want to look you over she said the zeugl might have injured you.
It didnt. I would have felt it.
After the elixirs? Dont be ridiculous. After the elixirs you wouldnt even have felt an open fracture until the protruding bones started snagging on hedges. And there might have been anything on the zeugl including tetanus and cadaveric poison. If anything happens theres still time for counter-measures. Turn around.
He felt the soft warmth of the lamps flame on his body and the occasional brushing of her hair.
Everything seems to be in order she said. Lie down before the elixirs knock you off your feet. Those mixtures are devilishly dangerous. Theyll destroy you in the end.
I have to take them before I fight.
Yennefer did not answer. She sat down at the looking glass once more and slowly combed her black curly shimmering locks. She always combed her hair before going to bed. Geralt found it peculiar but he adored watching her doing it. He suspected Yennefer was aware of it.
He suddenly felt very cold and the elixirs indeed jolted him numbed the nape of his neck and swirled around the bottom of his stomach in vortices of nausea. He cursed under his breath and fell heavily onto the bed without taking his eyes off Yennefer.
A movement in the corner of the chamber caught his attention. A smallish pitch-black bird sat on a set of antlers nailed crookedly to the wall and festooned in cobwebs.
Glancing sideways it looked at the Witcher with a yellow fixed eye.
Whats that Yen? How did it get here?
What? Yennefer turned her head. Oh that. Its a kestrel.
A kestrel? Kestrels are rufous and speckled and that ones black.
Its an enchanted kestrel. I made it.
What for?
I need it she cut him off. Geralt did not ask any more questions knowing that Yennefer would not answer.
Are you seeing Istredd tomorrow?
The sorceress moved the vials to the edge of the table put her comb into a small box and closed the side panels of the looking glass.
Yes. First thing. Why?
Nothing.
She lay down beside him without snuffing out the lamp. She never doused lights; she could not bear to fall asleep in the dark. Whether an oil lamp a lantern or a candle it had to burn right down. Always. One more foible. Yennefer had a remarkable number of foibles.
Yen?
Uh-huh?
When are we leaving?
Dont be tedious she tugged the eiderdown sharply. Weve only been here three days and youve asked that question at least thirty times. Ive told you I have things to deal with.
With Istredd?
Yes
He sighed and embraced her not concealing his intentions.
Hey she whispered. Youve taken elixirs…
What of it?
Nothing she giggled like a schoolgirl cuddling up to him arching her body and lifting herself to allow her nightdress to slip off. As usual the delight in her nakedness coursed in a shudder down his back and tingled in his fingers as they touched her skin. His lips touched her breasts rounded and delicate with nipples so pale they were visible only by their contours. He entwined his fingers in her hair her lilac-and-gooseberry perfumed hair.
She succumbed to his caresses purring like a cat rubbing her bent knee against his hip.
It rapidly turned out–as usual–that he had overestimated his stamina regarding the witcher elixirs had forgotten about their disagreeable effects on his body. But perhaps its not the elixirs he thought perhaps its exhaustion brought on by fighting risks danger and death? Exhaustion which has simply become routine? But my body even though artificially enhanced doesnt succumb to routine. It reacts naturally. Just not when its supposed to. Dammit.
But Yennefer as usual was not discouraged by a mere trifle. He felt her touch him heard her purr right by his ear. As usual he involuntarily pondered over the colossal number of occasions she must have used that most practical of spells. And then he stopped pondering.
As usual it was anything but ordinary.
He looked at her mouth at its corners twitching in an unwitting smile. He knew that smile well it always seemed to him more one of triumph than of happiness. He had never asked her about it. He knew she would not answer.
The black kestrel sitting on the antlers beat its wings and snapped its curved beak. Yennefer turned her head away and sighed. Very sadly.
Yen?
Its nothing Geralt she said kissing him. Its nothing.
The oil lamp glimmered and flickered. A mouse was scratching in the wall and a deathwatch beetle in the dresser clicked softly rhythmically and monotonously.
Yen?
Mhm?
Lets get away. I feel bad here. This town has an awful effect on me.
She turned over on her side ran a hand across his cheek brushing some strands of hair away. Her fingers travelled downwards touching the coarse scars marking the side of his neck.
Do you know what the name of this town means? Aedd Gynvael?
No. Is it in the elven speech?
Yes. It means a shard of ice.
Somehow it doesnt suit this lousy dump.
Among the elves the sorceress whispered pensively there is a legend about a Winter Queen who travels the land during snow-storms in a sleigh drawn by white horses. As she rides she casts hard sharp tiny shards of ice around her and woe betide anyone whose eye or heart is pierced by one of them. That person is then lost. No longer will anything gladden them; they find anything that doesnt have the whiteness of snow ugly obnoxious repugnant. They will not find peace will abandon everything and will set off after the Queen in pursuit of their dream and love. Naturally they will never find it and will die of longing. Apparently here in this town something like that happened in times long gone. Its a beautiful legend isnt it?
Elves can couch everything in pretty words he muttered drowsily running his lips over her shoulder. Its not a legend at all Yen. Its a pretty description of the hideous phenomenon that is the Wild Hunt the curse of several regions. An inexplicable collective madness compelling people to join a spectral cavalcade rushing across the sky. Ive seen it. Indeed it often occurs during the winter. I was offered rather good money to put an end to that blight but I didnt take it. Theres no way of dealing with the Wild Hunt…
Witcher she whispered kissing his cheek theres no romance in you. And I… I like elven legends they are so captivating. What a pity humans dont have any legends like that. Perhaps one day they will? Perhaps theyll create some? But what would human legends deal with? All around wherever one looks theres greyness and dullness. Even things which begin beautifully lead swiftly to boredom and dreariness to that human ritual that wearisome rhythm called life. Oh Geralt its not easy being a sorceress but comparing it to mundane human existence… Geralt? She laid her head on his chest which was rising and falling with slow breathing.
Sleep she whispered. Sleep Witcher.
The town was having a bad effect on him.
Since first thing that morning everything was spoiling his mood making him dejected and angry. Everything. It annoyed him that he had overslept so the morning had become to all intents and purposes the afternoon. He was irritated by the absence of Yennefer who had left before he woke up.
She must have been in a hurry because the paraphernalia she usually neatly put away in boxes was lying on the table randomly strewn like dice cast by a soothsayer performing a prophecy ritual. Brushes made from delicate horsehair: the large ones used for powdering her face the smaller ones which she used to apply lipstick to her mouth and the utterly tiny ones for the henna she used to dye her eyelashes. Pencils and sticks for her eyelids and eyebrows. Delicate silver tweezers and spoons. Small jars and bottles made of porcelain and milky glass containing as he knew elixirs and balms with ingredients as banal as soot goose grease and carrot juice and as menacingly mysterious as mandrake antimony belladonna cannabis dragons blood and the concentrated venom of the giant scorpion. And above all of that all around in the air the fragrance of lilac and gooseberry the scent she always used.
She was present in those objects. She was present in the fragrance.
But she was not there.
He went downstairs feeling anxiety and anger welling up in him. About everything.
He was annoyed by the cold congealed scrambled egg he was served for breakfast by the innkeeper who tore himself away for a moment from groping a girl in the kitchen. He was annoyed that the girl was no more than twelve years old. And had tears in her eyes.
The warm spring weather and cheerful chatter of the vibrant streets did not improve Geralts mood. He still did not enjoy being in Aedd Gynvael a small town which he deemed to be a nasty parody of all the small towns he knew; it was grotesquely noisier dirtier more oppressive and more irritating.
He could still smell the faint stench of the midden on his clothes and in his hair. He decided to go to the bathhouse.
In the bathhouse he was annoyed by the expression of the attendant looking at his witcher medallion and his sword lying on the edge of the tub. He was annoyed by the fact that the attendant did not offer him a whore. He had no intention of availing himself of one but in bathhouses everybody was offered them so he was annoyed by the exception being made for him.
When he left smelling strongly of lye ash soap his mood had not improved and Aedd Gynvael was no more attractive. There was still nothing there that he could find to like. The Witcher did not like the piles of sloppy manure filling the narrow streets. He did not like the beggars squatting against the wall of the temple. He did not like the crooked writing on the wall reading: ELVES TO THE RESERVATION!.
He was not allowed to enter the castle; instead they sent him to speak to the mayor in the merchants guild. That annoyed him. He was also annoyed when the dean of the guild an elf ordered him to search for the mayor in the market place looking at him with a curious contempt and superiority for someone who was about to be sent to a reservation.
The market place was teeming with people; it was full of stalls carts wagons horses oxen and flies. On a platform stood a pillory with a criminal being showered by the throng in mud and dung. The criminal with admirable composure showered his tormentors with vile abuse making little effort to raise his voice.
For Geralt who possessed considerable refinement the mayors reason for being among this clamour was absolutely clear. The visiting merchants from caravans included bribes in their prices and thus had to give someone the bribes. The mayor well aware of this custom would appear to ensure that the merchants would not have to go to any trouble.
The place from which he officiated was marked by a dirty-blue canopy supported on poles. Beneath it stood a table besieged by vociferous applicants. Mayor Herbolth sat behind the table displaying on his faded face scorn and disdain to all and sundry.
Hey! Where might you be going?
Geralt slowly turned his head. He instantly suppressed the anger he felt inside overcame his annoyance and froze into a cold hard shard of ice. He could not allow himself to become emotional. The man who stopped him had hair as yellow as oriole feathers and the same colour eyebrows over pale empty eyes. His slim long-fingered hands were resting on a belt made from chunky brass plates weighed down by a sword mace and two daggers.
Aha the man said. I know you. The Witcher isnt it? To see Herbolth?
Geralt nodded watching the mans hands the whole time. He knew it would be dangerous to take his eyes off them.
Ive heard of you the bane of monsters said the yellow-haired man also vigilantly observing Geralts hands. Although I dont think weve ever met you must also have heard of me. Im Ivo Mirce. But everyone calls me Cicada.
The Witcher nodded to indicate he had heard of him. He also knew the price that had been offered for Cicadas head in Vizima Caelf and Vattweir. Had he been asked his opinion he would have said it was a low price. But he had not been asked.
Very well Cicada said. The mayor from what I know is waiting for you. You may go on. But you leave your sword friend. Im paid here mark you to make sure etiquette is observed. No one is allowed to approach Herbolth with a weapon. Understood?
Geralt shrugged indifferently unfastened his belt wrapped it around the scabbard and handed the sword to Cicada. Cicada raised the corners of his mouth in a smile.
Well well he said. How meek not a word of protest. I knew the rumours about you were exaggerated. Id like you to ask for my sword one day; then youd see my answer.
Hi Cicada! the mayor called getting up. Let him through! Come here Lord Geralt look lively greetings to you. Step aside my dear merchants leave us for a moment. Your business dealings must yield to issues of greater note for the town. Submit your entreaties to my secretary!
The sham geniality of the greeting did not deceive Geralt. He knew it served exclusively as a bargaining ploy. The merchants were being given time to worry whether their bribes were sufficiently high.
Ill wager Cicada tried to provoke you Herbolth said raising his hand nonchalantly in response to the Witchers equally nonchalant nod. Dont fret about it. Cicada only draws his weapon when ordered to. True its not especially to his liking but while I pay him he has to obey or hell be out on his ear back on the highway. Dont fret about it.
Why the hell do you need someone like Cicada mayor? Is it so dangerous here?
Its not dangerous because Im paying Cicada Herbolth laughed. His fame goes before him and that suits me well. You see Aedd Gynvael and the other towns in the Dogbane valley fall under the authority of the viceroys of Rakverelin. And in recent times the viceroys have changed with every season. No one knows why they keep changing because anyway every second one is a half-elf or quarter-elf; accursed blood and race. Everything bad is the fault of the elves.
Geralt did not add that it was also the fault of the carters because the joke although well-known did not amuse everybody.
Every new viceroy Herbolth continued in a huff begins by removing the castellans and mayors of the old regime in order to give his friends and relations jobs. But after what Cicada once did to the emissaries of a certain viceroy no one tries to unseat me from my position any more and Im the oldest mayor of the oldest regime. Which one I cant even remember. Well but were sitting here chin-wagging and we need to get on as my late first wife was wont to say. Lets get to the point. What kind of creature had infested our muck heap?
A zeugl.
First time Ive ever heard of anything like that. I trust its dead?
It is.
How much will it cost the town treasury? Seventy?
A hundred.
Oh really Witcher sir! You must have been drinking hemlock! A hundred marks for killing a lousy worm that burrowed into a pile of shit?
Worm or no worm mayor it devoured eight people as you said yourself.
People? I like that! The brute so I am informed ate old Zakorek who was famous for never being sober one old bag from up near the castle and several children of the ferryman Sulirad which wasnt discovered very quickly because Sulirad himself doesnt know how many children he has. He produces them too quickly to count them. People my hat! Eighty.
Had I not killed the zeugl it would soon have devoured somebody more important. The apothecary let us say. And then where would you get your chancre ointment from? One hundred.
A hundred marks is a good deal of money. I dont know if Id give that much for a nine-headed hydra. Eighty-five.
A hundred Mayor Herbolth. Mark that although it wasnt a nine-headed hydra no local man including the celebrated Cicada was capable of dealing with the zeugl.
Because no local man is accustomed to slopping around in dung and refuse. This is my last word: ninety.
A hundred.
Ninety-five by all the demons and devils!
Agreed.
Well now Herbolth said smiling broadly thats settled. Do you always bargain so famously Witcher?
No Geralt did not smile. Seldom actually. But I wanted to give you the pleasure mayor.
And you did a pox on you Herbolth cackled. Hey Peregrib! Over here! Give me the ledger and a purse and count me out ninety marks at once.
It was supposed to be ninety-five.
What about the tax?
The Witcher swore softly. The mayor applied his sprawling mark to the receipt and then poked around in his ear with the clean end of the quill.
I trust thingsll be quiet on the muck heap now? Hey Witcher?
Ought to be. There was only one zeugl. Though there is a chance it managed to reproduce. Zeugls are hermaphroditic like snails.
What poppycock is that? Herbolth asked looking askance at him. You need two to reproduce I mean a male and a female. What do those zeugls hatch like fleas or mice from the rotten straw in a palliasse? Every dimwit knows there arent he-mice and she-mice that theyre all identical and hatch out of themselves from rotten straw.
And snails hatch from wet leaves secretary Peregrib interjected still busy piling up coins.
Everyone knows Geralt concurred smiling cheerfully. There arent he-snails and she-snails. There are only leaves. And anyone who thinks differently is mistaken.
Enough the mayor interrupted looking at him suspiciously. Ive heard enough about vermin. I asked whether anything might hatch from the muck heap so be so gracious as to answer clearly and concisely.
In a month or so the midden ought to be inspected ideally using dogs. Young zeugls arent dangerous.
Couldnt you do it Witcher? We can come to agreement about payment.
No Geralt said taking the money from Peregribs hands. I have no intention of being stuck in your charming town for even a week quite less a month.
Fascinating what youre telling me. Herbolth smiled wryly looking him straight in the eye. Fascinating indeed. Because I think youll be staying here longer.
You think wrong mayor.
Really? You came here with that black-haired witch what was it again I forget… Guinevere wasnt it? Youve taken lodgings with her at The Sturgeon. In a single chamber they say.
And what of it?
Well whenever she comes to Aedd Gynvael she does not leave so quickly. Its not the first time shes been here.
Peregrib smiled broadly gap-toothed and meaningfully. Herbolth continued to look Geralt in the eye without smiling. Geralt also smiled as hideously as he could.
Actually I dont know anything the mayor looked away and bored his heel into the ground. And it interests me as much as dogs filth. But the wizard Istredd is an important figure here mark you. Indispensable to this municipality. Invaluable Id say. People hold him in high regard locals and outsiders too. We dont stick our noses in his sorcery and especially not in his other matters.
Wisely perhaps the Witcher agreed. And where does he live if I may ask?
You dont know? Oh its right there do you see that house? That tall white one stuck between the storehouse and the armoury like if youll pardon the expression a candle between two arsecheeks. But you wont find him there now. Not long ago Istredd dug something up by the southern embankment and is now burrowing around there like a mole. And hes put some men to work on the excavation. I went over there and asked politely why master are you digging holes like a child folk are beginning to laugh. What is in that ground there? And he looks at me like Im some sort of pillock and says: History. What do you mean history? I asks. And he goes: The history of humanity. Answers to questions. To the question of what there was and the question of what there will be. There was fuck-all here I says to that except green fields bushes and werewolves before they built the town. And what there will be depends on who they appoint viceroy in Rakverelin; some lousy half-elf again. And theres no history in the ground theres nothing there except possibly worms if someones fond of angling. Do you think he listened? Fat chance. Hes still digging. So if you want to see him go to the southern embankment.
Oh come on mayor Peregrib snorted. Es at ome now. Why would e want to be at the diggings when hes…
Herbolth glanced at him menacingly. Peregrib bent over and cleared his throat shuffling his feet. The Witcher still smiling unpleasantly crossed his arms on his chest.
Yes hem hem the mayor coughed. Who knows perhaps Istredd really is at home. After all what does it…
Farewell mayor Geralt said not even bothering with an imitation of a bow. I wish you a good day.
He went over to Cicada who was coming out to meet him his weapons clinking. Without a word he held out his hand for his sword which Cicada was holding in the crook of his elbow. Cicada stepped back.
In a hurry Witcher?
Yes.
Ive examined your sword.
Geralt shot a look at him which with the best will in the world could not have been described as warm.
Thats quite something he nodded. Not many have. And even fewer could boast about it.
Ho ho. Cicada flashed his teeth. That sounded so menacing its given me the shivers. Its always interested me Witcher why people are so afraid of you. And now I think I know.
Im in a hurry Cicada. Hand over the sword it you dont mind.
Smoke in the eyes Witcher nothing but smoke. You witchers frighten people like a beekeeper frightens his bees with smoke and stench with your stony faces with all your talk and those rumours which you probably spread about yourselves. And the bees run from the smoke foolish things instead of shoving their stings in the witchers arse which will swell up like any other. They say you cant feel like people can. Thats lies. If one of you was properly stabbed youd feel it.
Have you finished?
Yes Cicada said handing him back his sword. Know what interests me Witcher?
Yes. Bees.
No. I was wondering if you was to enter an alley with a sword from one side and me from the other who would come out the other side? I reckon its worth a wager.
Why are you goading me Cicada? Looking for a fight? Whats it about?
Nothing. It just intrigues me how much truth there is in what folk say. That youre so good in a fight you witchers because theres no heart soul mercy or conscience in you. And that suffices? Because they say the same about me for example. And not without reason. So Im terribly interested which of us after going into that alley would come out of it alive. What? Worth a wager? What do you think?
I said Im in a hurry. Im not going to waste time on your nonsense. And Im not accustomed to betting. But if you ever decide to hinder me walking down an alley take my advice Cicada think about it first.
Smoke Cicada smiled. Smoke in the eyes Witcher. Nothing more. To the next time. Who knows maybe in some alley?
Who knows.
Well be able to talk freely here. Sit down Geralt.
What was most conspicuous about the workshop was the impressive number of books; they took up most of the space in the large chamber. Bulky tomes filled the bookcases on the walls weighed down shelves and were piled high on chests and cabinets. The Witcher judged that they must have cost a fortune. Of course neither was there any shortage of other typical elements of décor: a stuffed crocodile dried porcupine fish hanging from the ceiling a dusty skeleton and a huge collection of jars full of alcohol containing it seemed every conceivable abomination: centipedes spiders serpents toads and also countless human and non-human parts mainly entrails. There was even a homunculus or something that resembled a homunculus but might just as likely have been a smoked new-born baby.
The collection made no impression on Geralt who had lived with Yennefer in Vengerberg for six months and Yennefer had a yet more fascinating collection even including a phallus of exceptional proportions allegedly that of a mountain troll. She also possessed a very expertly stuffed unicorn on whose back she liked to make love. Geralt was of the opinion that if there existed a place less suitable for having sex it was probably only the back of a live unicorn. Unlike him who considered his bed a luxury and valued all the possible uses of that marvellous piece of furniture Yennefer was capable of being extremely extravagant. Geralt recalled some pleasant moments spent with the sorceress on a sloping roof in a tree hollow full of rotten wood on a balcony (someone elses to boot) on the railing of a bridge in a wobbly boat on a rushing river and levitating thirty fathoms above the earth. But the unicorn was the worst. One happy day however the dummy broke beneath him split and fell apart supplying much amusement.
What amuses you so much Witcher? Istredd asked sitting down behind a long table overlaid with a considerable quantity of mouldy skulls bones and rusty ironware.
Whenever I see things like that the Witcher said sitting down opposite the sorceror pointing at the array of jars I wonder whether you really cant make magic without all that stomach-turning ghastliness.
Its a matter of taste the sorcerer said and also of habit. What disgusts one person somehow doesnt bother another. And what Geralt repels you? I wonder what might disgust someone who as Ive heard is capable of standing up to his neck in dung and filth? Please do not treat that question as insulting or provocative. I am genuinely fascinated to learn what might trigger a feeling of repugnance in a witcher.
Does this jar by any chance contain the menstrual blood of an undefiled virgin Istredd? Well it disgusts me when I picture you a serious sorcerer with a phial in your hand trying to obtain that precious liquid drop by drop kneeling so to speak at the very source.
Touché Istredd said smiling. I refer naturally to your cutting wit because as regards the jars contents you were wide of the mark.
But you do use blood occasionally dont you? You cant even contemplate some spells Ive heard without the blood of a virgin ideally one killed by a lightning bolt from a clear sky during a full moon. In what way one wonders is that blood better than that of an old strumpet who fell drunk from a palisade?
In no way the sorcerer agreed a pleasant smile playing on his lips. But if it became common knowledge that that role could actually be played just as easily by hogs blood which is much easier to obtain then the rabble would begin experimenting with spells. But if it means the rabble having to gather and use virgins blood dragons tears white tarantulas venom decoction of severed babies hands or a corpse exhumed at midnight many would think again.
They were silent. Istredd apparently deep in thought tapped his fingernails on a cracked browned skull which lacked its lower jaw and ran his index finger over the serrated edge of a hole gaping in the temporal bone. Geralt observed him unobtrusively. He wondered how old the sorcerer might be. He knew that the more talented among them were capable of curbing the ageing process permanently and at any age they chose. Men preferred a mature age suggesting knowledge and experience for reasons of reputation and prestige. Women like Yennefer were concerned less with prestige and more with attractiveness. Istredd looked no older than a well-earned robust forty. He had straight slightly grizzled shoulder-length hair and numerous wrinkles on his forehead around his mouth and at the corners of his eyelids. Geralt did not know whether the profundity and wisdom in his benign grey eyes were natural or brought on by charms. A moment later he concluded that it made no difference.
Istredd he interrupted the awkward silence I came here because I wanted to see Yennefer. Even though she isnt here you invited me inside. To talk. About what? About the rabble trying to break your monopoly on the use of magic? I know you include me among that rabble. Thats nothing new to me. For a while I had the impression you would turn out to be different to your confreres who have often entered into serious conversations with me in order just to inform me that they dont like me.
I have no intention of apologising to you for my–as you call them–confreres the sorcerer answered calmly. I understand them for just like them in order to gain any level of proficiency at sorcery I had to apply myself seriously. While still a mere stripling when my peers were running around fields with bows fishing or playing odds and evens I was poring over manuscripts. My bones and joints ached from the stone floor in the tower–in the summer of course because in the winter the enamel on my teeth cracked. I would cough from the dust on old scrolls and books until my eyes bulged from their sockets and my master old Roedskilde never passed up an opportunity to flog me with a knout clearly believing that without it I would not achieve satisfactory progress in my studies. I didnt enjoy soldiering or wenching or drinking during the years when all those pleasures taste the best.
Poor thing the Witcher grimaced. Indeed it brings a tear to my eye.
Why the sarcasm? Im trying to explain why sorcerers arent fond of village quacks charmers healers wise women and witchers. Call it what you will even simple envy but here lies the cause of the animosity. It annoys us when we see magic–a craft we were taught to treat as an elite art a privilege of the few and a sacred mystery–in the hands of laymen and dilettantes. Even if it is shoddy pitiable derisory magic. That is why my confreres dont like you. Incidentally I dont like you either.
Geralt had had enough of the discussion of pussyfooting around of the feeling of anxiety which was crawling over the nape of his neck and his back like a snail. He looked straight into Istredds eyes and gripped the edge of the table.
Its about Yennefer isnt it?
The sorcerer lifted his head but continued to tap the skull on the table with his fingernails.
I commend your perspicacity he said steadily returning the Witchers gaze. My congratulations. Yes its about Yennefer.
Geralt was silent. Once years ago many many years ago as a young witcher he had been waiting to ambush a manticore. And he sensed the manticore approaching. He did not see or hear it. He sensed it. He had never forgotten that feeling. And now he felt exactly the same.
Your perspicacity the sorcerer went on will save us a great deal of the time we would have wasted on further fudging. And this way the issue is out in the open.
Geralt did not comment.
My close acquaintance with Yennefer Istredd continued goes back a long way Witcher. For a long time it was an acquaintance without commitment based on longer or shorter more or less regular periods of time together. This kind of noncommittal partnership is widely practised among members of our profession. Its just that it suddenly stopped suiting me. I determined to propose to her that she remain with me permanently.
How did she respond?
That she would think it over. I gave her time to do so. I know it is not an easy decision for her.
Why are you telling me this Istredd? What drives you apart from this admirable–but astonishing–candour so rarely seen among members of your profession? What lies behind it?
Prosaicness the sorcerer sighed. For you see your presence hinders Yennefer in making a decision. I thus request you to remove yourself. To vanish from her life to stop interfering. In short: that you get the hell out of here. Ideally quietly and without saying goodbye which as she confided in me you are wont to do.
Indeed Geralt smiled affectedly your blunt sincerity astonishes me more and more. I might have expected anything but not such a request. Dont you think that instead of asking me you ought rather to leap out and blast me with ball lightning? Youd be rid of the obstacle and thered just be a little soot to scrape off the wall. An easier–and more reliable–method. Because you see a request can be declined but ball lightning cant be.
I do not countenance the possibility of your refusing.
Why not? Would this strange request be nothing but a warning preceding the lightning bolt or some other cheerful spell? Or is this request to be supported by some weighty arguments? Or a sum which would stupefy an avaricious witcher? How much do you intend to pay me to get out of the path leading to your happiness?
The sorcerer stopped tapping the skull placed his hand on it and clenched his fingers around it. Geralt noticed his knuckles whitening.
I did not mean to insult you with an offer of that kind he said. I had no intention of doing so. But… if… Geralt I am a sorcerer and not the worst. I wouldnt dream of feigning omnipotence here but I could grant many of your wishes should you wish to voice them. Some of them as easily as this.
He waved a hand carelessly as though chasing away a mosquito. The space above the table suddenly teemed with fabulously coloured Apollo butterflies.
My wish Istredd the Witcher drawled shooing away the insects fluttering in front of his face is for you to stop pushing in between me and Yennefer. I dont care much about the propositions youre offering her. You could have proposed to her when she was with you. Long ago. Because then was then and now is now. Now shes with me. You want me to get out of the way make things easy for you? I decline. Not only will I not help you but Ill hinder you as well as my modest abilities allow. As you see Im your equal in candour.
You have no right to refuse me. Not you.
What do you take me for Istredd?
The sorcerer looked him in the eye and leaned across the table.
A fleeting romance. A passing fascination at best a whim an adventure of which Yenna has had hundreds because Yenna loves to play with emotions; shes impulsive and unpredictable in her whims. Thats what I take you for since having exchanged a few words with you Ive rejected the theory that she treats you entirely as an object. And believe me that happens with her quite often.
You misunderstood the question.
Youre mistaken; I didnt. But Im intentionally talking solely about Yennas emotions. For you are a witcher and you cannot experience any emotions. You do not want to agree to my request because you think she matters to you you think she… Geralt youre only with her because she wants it and youll only be with her as long as she wants it. And what you feel is a projection of her emotions the interest she shows in you. By all the demons of the Netherworld Geralt you arent a child; you know what you are. Youre a mutant. Dont understand me wrongly. I dont say it to insult you or show you contempt. I merely state a fact. Youre a mutant and one of the basic traits of your mutation is utter insensitivity to emotions. You were created like that in order to do your job. Do you understand? You cannot feel anything. What you take for emotion is cellular somatic memory if you know what those words mean.
It so happens I do.
All the better. Then listen. Im asking you for something which I can ask of a witcher but which I couldnt ask of a man. I am being frank with a witcher; with a man I couldnt afford to be frank. Geralt I want to give Yenna understanding and stability affection and happiness. Could you hand on heart pledge the same? No you couldnt. Those are meaningless words to you. You trail after Yenna like a child enjoying the momentary affection she shows you. Like a stray cat that everyone throws stones at you purr contented because here is someone whos not afraid to stroke you. Do you understand what I mean? Oh I know you understand. You arent a fool thats plain. You see yourself that you have no right to refuse me if I ask politely.
I have the same right to refuse as you have to ask Geralt drawled and in the process they cancel each other out. So we return to the starting point and that point is this: Yen clearly not caring about my mutation and its consequences is with me right now. You proposed to her thats your right. She said shed think it over? Thats her right. Do you have the impression Im hindering her in taking a decision? That shes hesitating? That Im the cause of her hesitation? Well thats my right. If shes hesitating she clearly has reason for doing so. I must be giving her something though perhaps the word is absent from the witcher dictionary.
Listen—
No. You listen to me. She used to be with you you say? Who knows perhaps it wasnt me but you who was the fleeting romance a caprice a victim of those uncontrolled emotions so typical of her. Istredd I cannot even rule out her treatment of you as completely objectionable. That my dear sorcerer cannot be ruled out just on the basis of a conversation. In this case it seems to me the object may be more relevant than eloquence.
Istredd did not even flinch he did not even clench his jaw. Geralt admired his self-control. Nonetheless the lengthening silence seemed to indicate that the blow had struck home.
Youre playing with words the sorcerer said finally. Youre becoming intoxicated with them. You try to substitute words for normal human feelings which you do not have. Your words dont express feelings they are only sounds like those that skull emits when you tap it. For you are just as empty as this skull. You have no right—
Enough Geralt interrupted harshly perhaps even a little too harshly. Stop stubbornly denying me rights. Ive had enough of it do you hear? I told you our rights are equal. No dammit mine are greater.
Really? the sorcerer said paling somewhat which caused Geralt unspeakable pleasure. For what reason?
The Witcher wondered for a moment and decided to finish him off.
For the reason he shot back that last night she made love with me and not with you.
Istredd pulled the skull closer to himself and stroked it. His hand to Geralts dismay did not even twitch.
Does that in your opinion give you any rights?
Only one. The right to draw a few conclusions.
Ah the sorcerer said slowly. Very well. As you wish. She made love with me this morning. Draw your own conclusions you have the right. I already have.
The silence lasted a long time. Geralt desperately searched for words. He found none. None at all.
This conversation is pointless he finally said getting up angry at himself because it sounded blunt and stupid. Im going.
Go to hell Istredd said equally bluntly not looking at him.
When she entered he was lying on the bed fully dressed with his hands under his head.
He pretended to be looking at the ceiling. He looked at her.
Yennefer slowly closed the door behind her. She was ravishing.
How ravishing she is he thought. Everything about her is ravishing. And menacing. Those colours of hers; that contrast of black and white. Beauty and menace. Her raven-black natural curls. Her cheekbones pronounced emphasising a wrinkle which her smile–if she deigned to smile–created beside her mouth wonderfully narrow and pale beneath her lipstick. Her eyebrows wonderfully irregular when she washed off the kohl that outlined them during the day. Her nose exquisitely too long. Her delicate hands wonderfully nervous restless and adroit. Her waist willowy and slender emphasised by an excessively tightened belt. Slim legs setting in motion the flowing shapes of her black skirt. Ravishing.
She sat down at the table without a word resting her chin on clasped hands.
Very well lets begin she said. This growing dramatic silence is too banal for me. Lets sort this out. Get out of bed and stop staring at the ceiling looking upset. The situation is idiotic enough and theres no point making it any more idiotic. Get up I said.
He got up obediently without hesitation and sat astride the stool opposite her. She did not avoid his gaze. He might have expected that.
As I said lets sort it out and sort it out quickly. In order not to put you in an awkward situation Ill answer any questions at once. You dont even have to ask them. Yes its true that when I came with you to Aedd Gynvael I was coming to meet Istredd and I knew I would go to bed with him. I didnt expect it to come out that youd boast about it to each other. I know how you feel now and Im sorry about that. But no I dont feel guilty.
He said nothing.
Yennefer shook her head her shining black locks cascading from her shoulders.
Geralt say something.
He… The Witcher cleared his throat he calls you Yenna.
Yes she said not lowering her eyes and I call him Val. Its his first name. Istredd is a nickname. Ive known him for years. Hes very dear to me. Dont look at me like that. Youre also dear to me. And thats the whole problem.
Are you considering accepting his proposal?
For your information I am. I told you weve known each other for years. For… many years. We share common interests goals and ambitions. We understand each other wordlessly. He can give me support and–who knows–perhaps therell come a day when Ill need it. And above all… he… he loves me. I think.
I wont stand in your way Yen.
She tossed her head and her violet eyes flashed with blue fire.
In my way? Dont you understand anything you idiot? If youd been in my way if you were bothering me Id have got rid of the obstacle in the blink of an eye Id have teleported you to the end of Cape Bremervoord or transported you to the land of Hann in a whirlwind. With a bit of effort Id have embedded you in a piece of quartz and put you in the garden in a bed of peonies. I could have purged your brain such that you would have forgotten who I was and what my name was. I could have done all that had I felt like it. But I could also have simply said: It was agreeable farewell. I could have quietly taken flight as you once did when you fled my house in Vengerberg.
Dont shout Yen dont be aggressive. And dont drag up that story from Vengerberg we swore not to go back to it after all. I dont bear a grudge against you Yen Im not reproaching you am I? I know you cant be judged by ordinary standards. And the fact that Im saddened… the fact that I know Im losing you… is cellular memory. The atavistic remnants of feelings in a mutant purged of emotion—
I cant stand it when you talk like that! she exploded. I cant bear it when you use that word. Dont ever use it again in my presence. Never!
Does it change the fact? After all I am a mutant.
There is no fact. Dont utter that word in front of me.
The black kestrel sitting on the stags antlers flapped its wings and scratched the perch with its talons. Geralt glanced at the bird at its motionless yellow eye. Once again Yennefer rested her chin on clasped hands.
Yen.
Yes Geralt.
You promised to answer my questions. Questions I dont even have to ask. One remains; the most important. The one Ive never asked you. Which Ive been afraid to ask. Answer it.
Im incapable of it Geralt she said firmly.
I dont believe you Yen. I know you too well.
No one can know a sorceress well.
Answer my question Yen.
My answer is: I dont know. But what kind of answer is that?
They were silent. The din from the street had diminished calmed down.
The sun setting in the west blazed through the slits of the shutters and pierced the chamber with slanting beams of light.
Aedd Gynvael the Witcher muttered. A shard of ice… I felt it. I knew this town… was hostile to me. Evil.
Aedd Gynvael she repeated slowly. The sleigh of the Elf Queen. Why? Why Geralt?
Im travelling with you Yen because the harness of my sleigh got entangled caught up in your runners. And a blizzard is all around me. And a frost. Its cold.
Warmth would melt the shard of ice in you the shard I stabbed you with she whispered. Then the spell would be broken and you would see me as I really am.
Then lash your white horses Yen. May they race north where a thaw never sets in. I hope it never sets in. I want to get to your ice castle as quickly as I can.
That castle doesnt exist Yennefer said her mouth twitching. She grimaced. Its a symbol. And our sleigh ride is the pursuit of a dream which is unattainable. For I the Elf Queen desire warmth. That is my secret. Which is why every year my sleigh carries me amidst a blizzard through some little town and every year someone dazzled by my spell gets their harness caught in my runners. Every year. Every year someone new. Endlessly. Because the warmth I so desire at the same time blights the spell blights the magic and the charm. My sweetheart stabbed with that little icy star suddenly becomes an ordinary nobody. And I become in his thawed out eyes no better than all the other… mortal women…
And from under the unblemished whiteness emerges spring he said. Emerges Aedd Gynvael an ugly little town with a beautiful name. Aedd Gynvael and its muck heap that enormous stinking pile of garbage which I have to enter because they pay me to because I was created to enter filth which fills other people with disgust and revulsion. I was deprived of the ability to feel so I wouldnt be able to feel how dreadfully vile is that vileness so I wouldnt retreat from it wouldnt run horror-stricken from it. Yes I was stripped of feelings. But not utterly. Whoever did it made a botch of it Yen.
They were silent. The black kestrel rustled its feathers unfurling and folding its wings.
Geralt…
Yes Yen.
Now you answer my question. The question Ive never asked you. The one Ive always feared. I wont ask you it this time either but answer it. Because… because I greatly desire to hear your answer. Its the one word the only word youve never told me. Utter it Geralt. Please.
I cannot Yen.
Why not?
You dont know? he smiled sadly. My answer would just be a word. A word which doesnt express a feeling doesnt express an emotion because Im bereft of them. A word which would be nothing but the sound made when you strike a cold empty skull.
She looked at him in silence. Her eyes wide open assumed an ardent violet colour. No Geralt she said thats not the truth. Or perhaps it is but not the whole truth. You arent bereft of feeling. Now I see it. Now I know you…
She was silent.
Complete the sentence Yen. Youve decided. Dont lie. I know you. I can see it in your eyes.
She did not lower her eyes. He knew.
Yen he whispered.
Give me your hand she said.
She took his hand between hers and at once he felt a tingling and the pulsing of blood in the veins of his forearm. Yennefer whispered a spell in a serene measured voice but he saw the beads of sweat which the effort caused to stipple her pale forehead saw her pupils dilate in pain.
Releasing his arm she extended her hands and moved them smoothing an invisible shape with tender strokes slowly from top to bottom. The air between her fingers began to congeal and become turbid swell and pulsate like smoke.
He watched in fascination. Creational magic–considered the most elevated accomplishment among sorcerers–always fascinated him much more than illusions or transformational magic. Yes Istredd was right he thought. In comparison with this kind of magic my Signs just look ridiculous.
The form of a bird as black as coal slowly materialised between Yennefers hands which were trembling with effort. The sorceress fingers gently stroked the ruffled feathers the small flattened head and curved beak. One more hypnotically fluid delicate movement and a black kestrel turning its head cried loudly. Its twin still sitting motionless on the antlers gave an answering cry.
Two kestrels Geralt said softly. Two black kestrels created by magic. I presume you need them both.
You presume right she said with effort. I need them both. I was wrong to believe one would suffice. How wrong I was Geralt. To what an error the vanity of the Ice Queen convinced of her omnipotence has brought me. For there are some… things… which there is no way of obtaining even by magic. And there are gifts which may not be accepted if one is unable to… reciprocate them… with something equally precious. Otherwise such a gift will slip through the fingers melt like a shard of ice gripped in the hand. Then only regret the sense of loss and hurt will remain…
Yen—
I am a sorceress Geralt… The power over matter which I possess is a gift. A reciprocated gift. For it I paid… with everything I possessed. Nothing remained.
He said nothing. The sorceress wiped her forehead with a trembling hand.
I was mistaken she repeated. But I shall correct my mistake. Emotions and feelings…
She touched the black kestrels head. The bird fluffed up its feathers and silently opened its curved beak.
Emotions whims and lies fascinations and games. Feelings and their absence. Gifts which may not be accepted. Lies and truth. What is truth? The negation of lies? Or the statement of a fact? And if the fact is a lie what then is the truth? Who is full of feelings which torment him and who is the empty carapace of a cold skull? Who? What is truth Geralt? What is the essence of truth?
I dont know Yen. Tell me.
No she said and lowered her eyes. For the first time. He had never seen her do that before. Never.
No she repeated. I cannot Geralt. I cannot tell you that. That bird begotten from the touch of your hand will tell you. Bird? What is the essence of truth?
Truth the kestrel said is a shard of ice.
VI
Although it seemed to him he was roaming the streets aimlessly and purposelessly he suddenly found himself at the southern wall by the excavations among the network of trenches criss-crossing the ruins by the stone wall and wandering in zigzags among the exposed squares of ancient foundations.
Istredd was there. Dressed in a smock with rolled-up sleeves and high boots he was shouting instructions to his servants who were digging with hoes into the coloured stripes of earth clay and charcoal which made up the walls of the excavation. Alongside on planks lay blackened bones shards of pots and other objects; unidentifiable corroded and gnarled into rusty lumps.
The sorcerer noticed him immediately. After giving the workers some loud instructions he jumped out of the trench and walked over wiping his hands on his britches.
Yes? What is it? he asked bluntly.
The Witcher standing in front of him without moving did not answer. The servants pretending to work watched them attentively whispering among themselves.
Youre almost bursting with hatred. Istredd grimaced. What is it I asked? Have you decided? Wheres Yenna? I hope she—
Dont hope too much Istredd.
Oho the sorcerer said. What do I hear in your voice? Is it what I sense it is?
And what is it you sense?
Istredd placed his fists on his hips and looked at the Witcher provocatively.
Lets not deceive ourselves Geralt he said. I hate you and you hate me. You insulted me by saying that Yennefer… you know what. I came back with a similar insult. Youre in my way and Im in your way. Lets solve this like men. I dont see any other solution. Thats why youve come here isnt it?
Yes Geralt said rubbing his forehead. Thats right Istredd. Thats why I came here. Undeniably.
Indeed. It cannot go on like this. Only today did I learn that for several years Yenna has been circulating between us like a rag ball. First shes with me then shes with you. She runs from me to look for you then the other way around. The others shes with during the breaks dont count. Only we two count. This cant go on. There are two of us but only one can remain.
Yes Geralt repeated without removing his hand from his forehead. Yes… Youre right.
In our conceit the sorcerer continued we thought that Yenna would without hesitation choose the better man. Neither of us was in any doubt as to who that was. In the end we started to argue over her favours like whipsters and like foolish whipsters understood what those favours were and what they meant. I suppose that like me youve thought it through and know how mistaken the two of us were. Yenna Geralt hasnt the slightest intention of choosing between us were we even to assume shes capable of choosing. Well well have to decide for her. For I wouldnt dream of sharing Yenna with anyone and the fact that youre here says the same about you. We Geralt simply know her too well. While there are two of us neither of us can be certain. There can only be one. Thats the truth isnt it?
It is the Witcher said moving his numb lips with difficulty. The truth is a shard of ice…
What?
Nothing.
Whats the matter with you? Are you infirm or in your cups? Or perhaps stuffed full of witcher herbs?
Theres nothing wrong with me. Ive… Ive got something in my eye. Istredd there can only be one. Yes thats why I came here. Undeniably.
I knew the sorcerer said. I knew youd come. As a matter of fact Im going to be frank with you. You anticipated my plans.
Ball lightning? the Witcher asked smiling wanly. Istredd frowned.
Perhaps he said. Perhaps therell be ball lightning. But definitely not shot from around the corner. Honourably face to face. Youre a witcher; that evens things out. Very well decide when and where.
Geralt pondered. And decided.
That little square… he pointed. I passed through it…
I know. Theres a well there called the Green Key.
By the well then. Yes indeed. By the well… Tomorrow two hours after sunup.
Very well. I shall be on time.
They stood still for a moment not looking at each other. The sorcerer finally muttered something to himself kicked a lump of clay and crushed it under his heel.
Geralt?
What?
Do you feel foolish by any chance?
Yes I do the Witcher reluctantly admitted.
Thats a relief Istredd muttered. Because I feel like an utter dolt. I never expected Id ever have to fight a witcher to the death over a woman.
I know how you feel Istredd.
Well… the sorcerer smiled affectedly. The fact that its come to this that Ive decided to do something so utterly against my nature proves that… that it has to be done.
I know Istredd.
Needless to say you know that whichever of us survives will have to flee at once and hide from Yenna at the end of the world?
I do.
And needless to say you count on being able to go back to her when she simmers down?
Of course.
Its all settled then the sorcerer said and made to turn away but after a moments hesitation held out his hand to him. Till tomorrow Geralt.
Till tomorrow the Witcher said shaking his hand. Till tomorrow Istredd.
VII
Hey Witcher!
Geralt looked up from the table on which he had been absentmindedly sketching fanciful squiggles in the spilled beer.
It was hard to find you Mayor Herbolth said sitting down and moving aside the jugs and beer mugs. They said in the inn that youd moved out to the stables but I only found a horse and some bundles of clothes there. And youre here… This is probably the most disreputable inn in the entire town. Only the worst scum comes here. What are you doing?
Drinking.
I can see that. I wanted to converse with you. Are you sober?
As a child.
Im pleased.
What is it you want Herbolth? As you can see Im busy Geralt smiled at the wench who was putting another jug on the table.
Theres a rumour doing the rounds the mayor said frowning that you and our sorcerer plan to kill each other.
Thats our business. His and mine. Dont interfere.
No it isnt your business Herbolth countered. We need Istredd we cant afford another sorcerer.
Go to the temple and pray for his victory then.
Dont scoff the mayor snapped and dont be a smart-arse you vagrant. By the Gods if I didnt know that the sorcerer would never forgive me I would have thrown you into the dungeons right at the very bottom or dragged you beyond the town behind two horses or ordered Cicada to stick you like a pig. But alas Istredd has a thing about honour and wouldnt have excused me it. I know you wouldnt forgive me either.
Its turned out marvellously the Witcher said draining another mug and spitting out a straw which had fallen into it. Im a lucky fellow amnt I. Is that all?
No Herbolth said taking a full purse out from under his coat. Here is a hundred marks Witcher. Take it and get out of Aedd Gynvael. Get out of here at once if possible but in any case before sunrise. I told you we cant afford another sorcerer and I wont let ours risk his neck in a duel with someone like you for a stupid reason because of some—
He broke off without finishing although the Witcher did not even flinch.
Take your hideous face away Herbolth Geralt said. And stick your hundred marks up your arse. Go away because the sight of you makes me sick. A little longer and Ill cover you in puke from your cap to your toes.
The mayor put away the purse and put both hands on the table.
If thats how you want it he said. I tried to let you leave of your own free will but its up to you. Fight cut each other up burn each other tear each other to pieces for that slut who spreads her legs for anyone who wants her. I think Istredd will give you such a thrashing you thug that only your boots will be left and if not Ill catch you before his body cools off and break all your bones on the wheel. I wont leave a single part of you intact you—
He did not manage to remove his hands from the table the Witchers movement was so swift. The arm which shot out from under the table was a blur in front of the mayors eyes and a dagger lodged with a thud between his fingers.
Perhaps the Witcher whispered clenching his fist on the daggers haft and staring into Herbolths face from which the blood had drained perhaps Istredd will kill me. But if not… Then Ill leave and dont try to stop me you vile scum if you dont want the streets of your filthy town to foam with blood. Now get out of here.
Mayor. Whats going on here? Hey you—
Calm down Cicada Herbolth said slowly withdrawing his hand cautiously sliding it across the table as far as possible from the daggers blade. Its nothing. Nothing.
Cicada returned his half-drawn sword to its scabbard. Geralt did not look at him. He did not look at the mayor as he left the inn shielded by Cicada from the staggering log drivers and carters. A small man with a ratty face and piercing black eyes sitting a few tables away was watching him.
Im annoyed he realised in amazement. My hands are trembling. Really my hands are trembling. Its astonishing whats happening to me. Could it mean that…?
Yes he thought looking at the little man with the ratty face. I think so.
Ill have to he thought.
How cold it is…
He got up.
He smiled as he looked at the small man. Then he drew aside the front of his jacket took two coins from the full purse and threw them on the table. The coins clinked. One of them rolled across the table and struck the daggers blade still stuck into the polished wood.
VIII
The blow fell unexpectedly the club swished softly in the darkness so fast that the Witcher only just managed to protect his head by instinctively raising an arm and only just managed to cushion the blow by lithely twisting his body. He sprang aside dropping on one knee somersaulted landed on his feet felt a movement of the air yielding before another swing of the club evaded the blow with a nimble pirouette spinning between the two shapes closing in on him in the dark and reached above his right shoulder. For his sword.
His sword was not there.
Nothing can take these reactions from me he thought leaping smoothly aside. Routine? Cellular memory? Im a mutant I react like a mutant he thought dropping to one knee again dodging a blow and reaching into his boot for his dagger. There was no dagger.
He smiled wryly and was hit on the head with a club. A light blazed in his eyes and the pain shot down to his fingertips. He fell relaxing still smiling.
Somebody flopped onto him pressing him against the ground. Somebody else ripped the purse from his belt. His eye caught sight of a knife flashing. The one kneeling on his chest tore open his jerkin at the neck seized the chain and pulled out his medallion. And immediately let go of it.
By Baal-Zebuth Geralt heard somebody pant. Its a witcher… A real bruiser…
The other swore breathing heavily.
He didnt have a sword… O Gods save us from the Evil… Lets scarper Radgast! Dont touch him.
For a moment the moon shone through a wispy cloud. Geralt saw just above him a gaunt ratty face and small black shining eyes. He heard the other mans loud footsteps fading away vanishing into an alleyway reeking of cats and burnt fat.
The small man with the ratty face slowly removed his knee from Geralts chest.
Next time… Geralt heard the clear whisper next time you feel like killing yourself Witcher dont drag other people into it. Just hang yourself in the stable from your reins.
IX
It must have rained during the night.
Geralt walked out in front of the stable wiping his eyes combing the straw from his hair with his fingers. The rising sun glistened on the wet roofs gleamed gold in the puddles. The Witcher spat. He still had a nasty taste in his mouth and the lump on his head throbbed with a dull ache.
A scrawny black cat sat on a rail in front of the stable licking a paw intently.
Here kitty kitty the Witcher said. The cat stopped what it was doing and looked at him malevolently flattened its ears and hissed baring its little fangs.
I know Geralt nodded. I dont like you either. Im only joking.
He pulled tight the loosened buckles and clasps of his jerkin with unhurried movements smoothed down the creases in his clothing and made sure it did not hinder his freedom of movement at any point. He slung his sword across his back and adjusted the position of the hilt above his right shoulder. He tied a leather band around his forehead pulling his hair back behind his ears. He pulled on long combat gloves bristling with short conical silver spikes.
He glanced up at the sun once more his pupils narrowing into vertical slits. A glorious day he thought. A glorious day for a fight.
He sighed spat and walked slowly down the narrow road beside walls giving off the pungent penetrating aroma of wet plaster and lime mortar.
Hey freak!
He looked around. Cicada flanked by three suspicious-looking armed individuals sat on a heap of timbers piled up beside the embankment. He rose stretched and walked into the middle of the alley carefully avoiding the puddles.
Where you going? he asked placing his slender hands on his belt weighed down with weapons.
None of your business.
Just to be clear I dont give a tinkers cuss about the mayor the sorcerer or this whole shitty town Cicada said slowly emphasising the words. This is about you Witcher. You wont make it to the end of this alley. Hear me? I want to find out how good a fighter you are. The matters tormenting me. Stop I said.
Get out of my way.
Stop! Cicada yelled placing a hand on his sword hilt. Didnt you hear what I said? Were going to fight! Im challenging you! Well soon see whos the better man!
Geralt shrugged without slowing down.
Im challenging you to fight! Do you hear me mutant? Cicada shouted barring his way again. What are you waiting for? Draw your weapon! What got cold feet? Or perhaps youre nothing more than one of those other fools whos humped that witch of yours like Istredd?
Geralt walked on forcing Cicada to retreat to walk clumsily backwards. The individuals with Cicada got up from the pile of timbers and followed them although they hung back a little way off. Geralt heard the mud squelching beneath their boots.
I challenge you! Cicada repeated blanching and flushing by turns. Do you hear me you witcher pox? What else do I have to do to you? Spit in your ugly face?
Go ahead and spit.
Cicada stopped and indeed took a breath pursing his lips to spit. He was watching the Witchers eyes not his hands and that was a mistake. Geralt still not slowing down struck him very fast without a backswing just flexing from the knees his fist encased in the spiked glove. He punched Cicada right in the mouth straight in his twisted lips. They split exploding like mashed cherries. The Witcher crouched and struck once again in the same place this time from a short backswing feeling the fury spilling from him with the force and the momentum. Cicada whirling around with one foot in the mud and the other in the air spat blood and splashed onto his back into a puddle. The Witcher hearing behind him the hiss of a sword blade in the scabbard stopped and turned sinuously around his hand on his sword hilt.
Well he said in a voice trembling with anger be my guests.
The one who had drawn the sword looked him in the eyes. Briefly. Then he averted his gaze. The others began to fall back. First slowly then more and more quickly. Hearing it the man with the sword also stepped back noiselessly moving his lips. The furthest away of them turned and ran splattering mud. The others froze to the spot not attempting to come closer.
Cicada turned over in the mud and dragged himself up on his elbows. He mumbled hawked and spat out something white amid a lot of red. As Geralt passed he casually kicked him in the face shattering his cheekbone and sending him splashing into the puddle again.
He walked on without looking back.
Istredd was already by the well and stood leaning against it against the wooden cover green with moss. He had a sword in his belt. A magnificent light Terganian sword with a half-basket hilt the metal-fitted end of the scabbard resting against the shining leg of a riding boot. A black bird with ruffled feathers sat on the sorcerers shoulder.
It was a kestrel.
Youre here Witcher Istredd said proffering the kestrel a gloved hand and gently and cautiously setting the bird down on the canopy of the well.
Yes I am Istredd.
I hadnt expected you to come. I thought youd leave town.
I didnt.
The sorcerer laughed loudly and freely throwing his head back.
She wanted… she wanted to save us he said. Both of us. Never mind Geralt. Lets cross swords. Only one of us can remain.
Do you mean to fight with a sword?
Does that surprise you? After all you do. Come on have at you.
Why Istredd? Why with swords and not with magic?
The sorcerer blanched and his mouth twitched anxiously.
Have at you I said! he shouted. This is not the time for questions; that time has passed! Now is the time for deeds!
I want to know Geralt said slowly. I want to know why with swords. I want to know why you have a black kestrel and where it came from. I have the right to know. I have the right to know the truth Istredd.
The truth? the sorcerer repeated bitterly. Yes perhaps you have. Perhaps you have. Our rights are equal. The kestrel you ask? It came at dawn wet from the rain. It brought a letter. A very short one I know it by heart. Farewell Val. Forgive me. There are gifts which one may not accept and there is nothing in me I could repay you with. And that is the truth Val. Truth is a shard of ice. Well Geralt? Are you satisfied? Have you availed yourself of your right?
The Witcher slowly nodded.
Good Istredd said. Now I shall avail myself of mine. Because I dont acknowledge that letter. Without her I cannot… I prefer to… Have at you dammit!
He crouched over and drew his sword with a swift lithe movement demonstrating his expertise. The kestrel cried.
The Witcher stood motionless his arms hanging at his sides.
What are you waiting for? the sorcerer barked.
Geralt slowly raised his head looked at him for a moment and then turned on his heel.
No Istredd he said quietly. Farewell.
What do you bloody mean?
Geralt stopped.
Istredd he said over his shoulder. Dont drag other people into your suicide. If you must hang yourself in the stable from your reins.
Geralt! the sorcerer screamed and his voice suddenly cracked jarring the ear with a false wrong note. Im not giving up! She wont run away from me! Ill follow her to Vengerberg Ill follow her to the end of the world. Ill find her! Ill never give her up! Know that!
Farewell Istredd.
He walked off into the alley without turning back at all. He walked paying no attention to the people quickly getting out of his way or to the hurried slamming of doors and shutters. He did not notice anybody or anything.
He was thinking about the letter waiting for him in the inn.
He speeded up. He knew that a black kestrel wet from the rain holding a letter in its curved beak was waiting for him on the bed-head. He wanted to read the letter as soon as possible.
Even though he knew what was in it.
ETERNAL FLAME
I
You pig! You plague-stricken warbler! You trickster!
Geralt his interest piqued led his mare around the corner of the alleyway. Before he located the source of the screams a deep stickily glassy clink joined them. A large jar of cherry preserve thought the Witcher. A jar of cherry preserve makes that noise when you throw it at somebody from a great height or with great force. He remembered it well. When he lived with Yennefer she would occasionally throw jars of preserve at him in anger. Jars she had received from clients. Yennefer had no idea how to make preserve–her magic was fallible in that respect.
A large group of onlookers had formed around the corner outside a narrow pink-painted cottage. A young fair-haired woman in a nightdress was standing on a tiny balcony decorated with flowers just beneath the steep eaves of the roof. Bending a plump fleshy arm visible beneath the frills of her nightdress the woman hurled down a chipped flowerpot.
A slim man in a plum bonnet with a white feather jumped aside like a scalded cat and the flowerpot crashed onto the ground just in front of him shattering into pieces.
Please Vespula! the man in the bonnet shouted Dont lend credence to the gossip! I was faithful to you may I perish if it is not true!
You bastard! You son of the Devil! You wretch! the plump blonde yelled and went back into the house no doubt in search of further missiles.
Hey Dandelion called the Witcher leading his resisting and snorting mare onto the battlefield. How are you? Whats going on?
Nothing special said the troubadour grinning. The usual. Greetings Geralt. What are you doing here? Bloody hell look out!
A tin cup whistled through the air and bounced off the cobbles with a clang. Dandelion picked it up looked at it and threw it in the gutter.
Take those rags the blonde woman screamed the frills on her plump breasts swaying gracefully and get out of my sight! Dont set foot here again you bastard!
These arent mine Dandelion said in astonishment taking a pair of mens trousers with odd-coloured legs from the ground. Ive never had trousers like these in my life.
Get out! I dont want to see you anymore! You… you… Do you know what youre like in bed? Pathetic! Pathetic do you hear! Do you hear everybody?
Another flowerpot whistled down a dried stalk that had grown out of it flapping. Dandelion barely managed to dodge. Following the flowerpot a copper cauldron of at least two and a half gallons came spinning down. The crowd of onlookers standing a safe distance away from the cannonade reeled with laughter. The more active and unprincipled jokers among them applauded and incited the blonde to further action.
She doesnt have a crossbow in the house does she? the Witcher asked anxiously.
It cant be ruled out said the poet lifting his head up towards the balcony. She has a load of junk in there. Did you see those trousers?
Perhaps we ought to get out of here? You can come back when she calms down.
Hell no Dandelion grimaced. I shall never go back to a house from which calumny and copper pots are showered on me. I consider this fickle relationship over. Lets just wait till she throws my… Oh mother no! Vespula! My lute!
He lunged forward arms outstretched stumbled fell and caught the instrument at the last moment just above the cobbles. The lute spoke plaintively and melodiously.
Phew sighed the bard springing up Ive got it. Its fine Geralt we can go now. Admittedly my cloak with the marten collar is still there but too bad let it be my grievance. Knowing her she wont throw the cloak down.
You lying sloven! the blonde screamed and spat copiously from the balcony. You vagrant! You croaking pheasant!
Whats the matter with her? What have you been up to Dandelion?
Nothing unusual the troubadour shrugged. She demands monogamy like they all do and then throws another mans trousers at a fellow. Did you hear what she was screaming about me? By the Gods I also know some women who decline their favours more prettily than she gives hers but I dont shout about it from the rooftops. Lets go.
Where do you suggest we go?
Are you serious? The temple of the Eternal Fire? Lets drop into the Spear Blade. I have to calm my nerves.
Without protest the Witcher led his mare after Dandelion who had headed off briskly into a narrow lane. The troubadour tightened the pegs of his lute as he strode strummed the strings to test them and played a deep resounding chord.
The air bears autumns cool scent
Our words seized by an icy gust
Your tears have my heart rent
But all is gone and part we must.
He broke off waving cheerfully at two maids who were passing carrying baskets of vegetables. The girls giggled.
What brings you to Novigrad Geralt?
Fitting out. A harness some tackle. And a new jacket. The Witcher pulled down the creaking fresh-smelling leather. How do you like it Dandelion?
You dont keep up with the fashion the bard grimaced brushing a chicken feather from his gleaming cornflower-blue kaftan with puffed sleeves and a serrated collar. Oh Im glad weve met. Here in Novigrad the capital of the world the centre and cradle of culture. Here a cultured man can live life to the full.
Lets live it one lane further on suggested Geralt glancing at a tramp who had squatted down and was defecating eyes bulging in an alleyway.
Your constant sarcasm is becoming annoying Dandelion said grimacing again. Novigrad I tell you is the capital of the world. Almost thirty thousand dwellers Geralt not counting travellers; just imagine! Brick houses cobbled main streets a seaport stores shops four watermills slaughterhouses sawmills a large manufactory making beautiful slippers and every conceivable guild and trade. A mint eight banks and nineteen pawnbrokers. A castle and guardhouse to take the breath away. And diversions: a scaffold a gallows with a drop thirty-five taverns a theatre a menagerie a market and a dozen whorehouses. And I cant remember how many temples but plenty. Oh and the women Geralt; bathed coiffured and fragrant; those satins velvets and silks those whalebones and ribbons… Oh Geralt! The rhymes pour out by themselves:
Around your house now white from frost
Sparkles ice on the pond and marsh
Your longing eyes grieve what is lost
But naught can change this parting harsh…
A new ballad?
Aye. Ill call it Winter. But its not ready yet I cant finish it. Vespulas made me completely jittery and the rhymes wont come together. Ah Geralt I forgot to ask how is it with you and Yennefer?
It isnt.
I understand.
No you bloody dont. Is it far to this tavern?
Just round the corner. Ah here we are. Can you see the sign?
Yes I can.
My sincere and humble greetings! Dandelion flashed a smile at the wench sweeping the steps. Has anyone ever told you my lady that you are gorgeous?
The wench flushed and gripped her broom tightly. For a moment Geralt thought she would whack the troubadour with the handle. He was mistaken. The wench smiled engagingly and fluttered her eyelashes. Dandelion as usual paid absolutely no attention.
Greetings to one and all! Good day! he bellowed entering the tavern and plucking the lute strings hard with his thumb. Master Dandelion the most renowned poet in this land has visited your tawdry establishment landlord! For he has a will to drink beer! Do you mark the honour I do you swindler?
I do said the innkeeper morosely leaning forward over the bar. Im content to see you minstrel sir. I see that your word is indeed your bond. After all you promised to stop by first thing to pay for yesterdays exploits. And I–just imagine–presumed you were lying as usual. I swear I am ashamed.
There is no need to feel shame my good man the troubadour said light-heartedly for I have no money. We shall converse about that later.
No the innkeeper said coldly. We shall converse about it right away. Your credit has finished my lord poet. No one befools me twice in a row.
Dandelion hung up his lute on a hook protruding from the wall sat down at a table took off his bonnet and pensively stroked the egrets feather pinned to it.
Do you have any funds Geralt? he asked with hope in his voice.
No I dont. Everything I had went on the jacket.
That is ill that is ill Dandelion sighed. Theres not a bloody soul to stand a round. Innkeeper why is it so empty here today?
Its too early for ordinary drinkers. And the journeymen masons who are repairing the temple have already been and returned to the scaffolding taking their master with them.
And theres no one no one at all?
No one aside from the honourable merchant Biberveldt who is breaking his fast in the large snug.
Daintys here? Dandelion said pleased. You should have said at once. Come to the snug Geralt. Do you know the halfling Dainty Biberveldt?
No.
Never mind. You can make his acquaintance. Ah! the troubadour called heading towards the snug. I smell from the east a whiff and hint of onion soup pleasing to my nostrils. Peekaboo! Its us! Surprise!
A chubby-cheeked curly-haired halfling in a pistachio-green waistcoat was sitting at the table in the centre of the chamber beside a post decorated with garlands of garlic and bunches of herbs. In his left hand he held a wooden spoon and in his right an earthenware bowl. At the sight of Dandelion and Geralt the halfling froze and opened his mouth and his large nut-brown eyes widened in fear.
What cheer Dainty? Dandelion said blithely waving his bonnet. The halfling did not move or close his mouth. His hand Geralt noticed was trembling a little and the long strips of boiled onion hanging from the spoon were swinging like a pendulum.
Gggreetings… gggreetings Dandelion he stammered and swallowed loudly.
Do you have the hiccoughs? Would you like me to frighten you? Look out: your wifes been seen on the turnpike! Shell be here soon. Gardenia Biberveldt in person! Ha ha ha!
You really are an ass Dandelion the halfling said reproachfully.
Dandelion laughed brightly again simultaneously playing two complicated chords on his lute.
Well you have an exceptionally stupid expression on your face and youre goggling at us as though we had horns and tails. Perhaps youre afraid of the Witcher? What? Perhaps you think halfling season has begun? Perhaps—
Stop it Geralt snapped unable to stay quiet and walked over to the table. Forgive us friend. Dandelion has experienced a serious personal tragedy and he still hasnt got over it. Hes trying to mask his sorrow dejection and disgrace by being witty.
Dont tell me the halfling said finally slurping up the contents of the spoon. Let me guess. Vespula has finally thrown you out on your ear? What Dandelion?
I dont engage in conversations on sensitive subjects with individuals who drink and gorge themselves while their friends stand the troubadour said and then sat down without waiting. The half-ling scooped up a spoon of soup and licked off the threads of cheese hanging from it.
Right you are he said glumly. So be my guests. Sit you down and help yourselves. Would you like some onion potage?
In principle I dont dine at such an early hour Dandelion said putting on airs but very well. Just not on an empty stomach. I say landlord! Beer if you please! And swiftly!
A lass with an impressive thick plait reaching her hips brought them mugs and bowls of soup. Geralt observing her round downy face thought that she would have a pretty mouth if she remembered to keep it closed.
Forest dryad! Dandelion cried seizing the girls arm and kissing her on her open palm. Sylph! Fairy! O Divine creature with eyes like azure lakes! Thou art as exquisite as the morn and the shape of thy parted lips are enticingly…
Give him some beer quick Dainty groaned. Or itll end in disaster.
No it wont no it wont the bard assured him. Right Geralt? Youd be hard pressed to find more composed men than we two. I dear sir am a poet and a musician and music soothes the savage breast. And the Witcher here present is menacing only to monsters. I present Geralt of Rivia the terror of strigas werewolves and sundry vileness. Youve surely heard of Geralt Dainty?
Yes I have the halfling said glowering suspiciously at the Witcher. What… What brings you to Novigrad sir? Have some dreadful monsters been sighted here? Have you been… hem hem… commissioned?
No smiled the Witcher Im here for my own amusement.
Oh Dainty said nervously wriggling his hirsute feet which were dangling half a cubit above the floor thats good…
Whats good? Dandelion asked swallowing a spoonful of soup and sipping some beer. Do you plan to support us Biberveldt? In our amusements I mean? Excellent. We intend to get tipsy here in the Spear Blade. And then we plan to repair to the Passiflora a very dear and high-class den of iniquity where we may treat ourselves to a half-blood she-elf and who knows maybe even a pure-blood she-elf. Nonetheless we need a sponsor.
What do you mean?
Someone to pay the bills.
As I thought Dainty muttered. Im sorry. Firstly Ive arranged several business meetings. Secondly I dont have the funds to sponsor such diversions. Thirdly they only admit humans to the Passiflora.
What are we then short-eared owls? Oh I understand? They dont admit halflings. Thats true. Youre right Dainty. This is Novigrad. The capital of the world.
Right then… the halfling said still looking at the Witcher and twisting his mouth strangely. Ill be off. Im due to be—
The door to the chamber opened with a bang and in rushed…
Dainty Biberveldt.
O ye Gods! Dandelion yelled.
The halfling standing in the doorway in no way differed from the halfling sitting at the table if one were to disregard the fact that the one at the table was clean and the one in the doorway was dirty dishevelled and haggard.
Got you you bitchs tail! the dirty halfling roared lunging at the table. You thief!
His clean twin leaped to his feet overturning his stool and knocking the dishes from the table. Geralt reacted instinctively and very quickly. Seizing his scabbarded sword from the table he lashed Biberveldt on the nape of his neck with the heavy belt. The half-ling tumbled onto the floor rolled over dived between Dandelions legs and scrambled towards the door on all fours his arms and legs suddenly lengthening like a spiders. Seeing this the dirty Dainty Biberveldt swore howled and jumped out of the way slamming his back into the wooden wall. Geralt threw aside the scabbard and kicked the stool out of the way darting after him. The clean Dainty Biberveldt–now utterly dissimilar apart from the colour of his waistcoat–cleared the threshold like a grasshopper and hurtled into the common bar colliding with the lass with the half-open mouth. Seeing his long limbs and melted grotesque physiognomy the lass opened her mouth to its full extent and uttered an ear-splitting scream. Geralt taking advantage of the loss of momentum caused by the collision caught up with the creature in the centre of the chamber and knocked it to the ground with a deft kick behind the knee.
Dont move a muscle chum he hissed through clenched teeth holding the point of his sword to the odditys throat. Dont budge.
Whats going on here? the innkeeper yelled running over clutching a spade handle. Whats this all about? Guard! Detchka run and get the guard!
No! the creature wailed flattening itself against the floor and deforming itself even more. Have mercy nooooo!
Dont call them! the dirty halfling echoed rushing out of the snug. Grab that girl Dandelion!
The troubadour caught the screaming Detchka carefully choosing the places to seize her by. Detchka squealed and crouched on the floor by his legs.
Calm down innkeeper Dainty Biberveldt panted. Its a private matter we wont call out the guard. Ill pay for any damage.
There isnt any damage the innkeeper said level-headedly looking around.
But there will be the plump halfling said gnashing his teeth because Im going to thrash him. And properly. Im going to thrash him cruelly at length and frenziedly and then everything here will be broken.
The long-limbed and spread-out caricature of Dainty Biberveldt flattened on the floor snivelled pathetically.
Nothing doing the innkeeper said coldly squinting and raising the spade handle a little. Thrash it in the street or in the yard sir not here. And Im calling the guard. Needs must it is my duty. Forsooth… its some kind of monster!
Innkeeper sir Geralt said calmly not relieving the pressure on the freaks neck keep your head. No one is going to destroy anything there wont be any damage. The situation is under control. Im a witcher and as you can see I have the monster in my grasp. And because indeed it does look like a private matter well calmly sort it out here in the snug. Release the girl Dandelion and come here. I have a silver chain in my bag. Take it out and tie the arms of this gentleman securely around the elbows behind its back. Dont move chum.
The creature whimpered softly.
Very well Geralt Dandelion said Ive tied it up. Lets go to the snug. And you landlord what are you standing there for? I ordered beer. And when I order beer youre to keep serving me until I shout Water.
Geralt pushed the tied-up creature towards the snug and roughly sat him down by the post. Dainty Biberveldt also sat down and looked at him in disgust.
Its monstrous the way it looks he said. Just like a pile of fermenting dough. Look at its nose Dandelion itll fall off any second gorblimey. And its ears are like my mother-in-laws just before her funeral. Ugh!
Hold hard hold hard Dandelion muttered. Are you Biberveldt? Yes you are without doubt. But whatevers sitting by that post was you a moment ago. If Im not mistaken. Geralt! Everybodys watching you. Youre a witcher. What the bloody hell is going on here? What is it?
Its a mimic.
Youre a mimic yourself the creature said in a guttural voice swinging its nose. I am not a mimic Im a doppler and my name is Tellico Lunngrevink Letorte. Penstock for short. My close friends call me Dudu.
Ill give you Dudu you whoreson! Dainty yelled aiming a punch at him. Where are my horses? You thief!
Gentlemen the innkeeper cautioned them entering with a jug and a handful of beer mugs you promised things would be peaceful.
Ah beer the halfling sighed. Oh but Im damned thirsty. And hungry!
I could do with a drink too Tellico Lunngrevink Letorte declared gurglingly. He was totally ignored.
What is it? the innkeeper asked contemplating the creature who at the sight of the beer stuck its long tongue out beyond sagging doughy lips. What is it gentlemen?
A mimic the Witcher repeated heedless of the faces the monster was making. It actually has many names. A changeling shape-shifter vexling or fetch. Or a doppler as it called itself.
A vexling! the innkeeper yelled. Here in Novigrad? In my inn? Swiftly we must call the guard! And the priests! Or it will be on my head…
Easy does it Dainty Biberveldt rasped hurriedly finishing off Dandelions soup from a bowl which by some miracle had not been spilled. Therell be time to call anyone we need. But later. This scoundrel robbed me and I have no intention of handing it over to the local law before recovering my property. I know you Novigradians–and your judges. I might get a tenth nothing more.
Have mercy the doppler whimpered plaintively. Dont hand me over to humans! Do you know what they do to the likes of me?
Naturally we do the innkeeper nodded. The priests perform exorcisms on any vexling they catch. Then they tie it up with a stick between its knees and cover it thickly with clay mixed with iron filings roll it into a ball and bake it in a fire until the clay hardens into brick. At least thats what used to be done years ago when these monsters occurred more often.
A barbaric custom. Human indeed Dainty said grimacing and pushing the now empty bowl away but perhaps it is a just penalty for banditry and thievery. Well talk you good-for-nothing where are my horses? Quickly before I stretch that nose of yours between your legs and shove it up your backside! Where are my horses I said.
Ive… Ive sold them Tellico Lunngrevink Letorte stammered and his sagging ears suddenly curled up into balls resembling tiny cauliflowers.
Sold them! Did you hear that? the halfling cried frothing at the mouth. It sold my horses!
Of course Dandelion said. It had time to. Its been here for three days. For the last three days youve… I mean its… Dammit Dainty does that mean—
Of course thats what it means! the merchant yelled stamping his hairy feet. It robbed me on the road a days ride from the city! It came here as me get it? And sold my horses! Ill kill it! Ill strangle it with my bare hands!
Tell us how it happened Mr Biberveldt.
Geralt of Rivia if Im not mistaken? The Witcher?
Geralt nodded in reply.
Thats a stroke of luck the halfling said. Im Dainty Biberveldt of Knotgrass Meadow. Farmer stock breeder and merchant. Call me Dainty Geralt.
Say on Dainty.
Very well it was like this. Me and my ostlers were driving my horses to be sold at the market in Devils Ford. We had our last stop a days ride from the city. We overnighted having first dealt with a small cask of burnt caramel vodka. I woke up in the middle of the night feeling like my bladder was about to burst got off the wagon and I thought to myself Ill take a look at what the nags are doing in the meadow. I walk out fog thick as buggery I look and suddenly someones coming. Who goes there? I ask. He says nothing. I walk up closer and see… myself. Like in a looking glass. I think I oughtnt to have drunk that bloody moonshine accursed spirit. And this one here–for thats what it was–ups and conks me on the noggin! I saw stars and went arse over tit. The next day I woke up in a bloody thicket with a lump like a cucumber on my head and not a soul in sight not a sign of our camp either. I wandered the whole day before I finally found the trail. Two days I trudged eating roots and raw mushrooms. And in the meantime that… that lousy Dudulico or whatever it was has ridden to Novigrad as me and flogged my horses! Ill get the bloody… And Ill thrash my ostlers! Ill give each one a hundred lashes on his bare arse the cretins! Not to recognise their own guvnor to let themselves be outwitted like that! Numbskulls imbeciles sots…
Dont be too hard on them Dainty Geralt said. They didnt have a chance. A mimic copies so exactly theres no way of distinguishing it from the original–I mean from its chosen victim. Have you never heard of mimics?
Some. But I thought it was all fiction.
Well it isnt. All a doppler has to do is observe its victim closely in order to quickly and unerringly adapt to the necessary material structure. I would point out that its not an illusion but a complete precise transformation. To the minutest detail. How a mimic does it no one knows. Sorcerers suspect the same component of the blood is at work here as with lycanthropy but I think its either something totally different or a thousandfold more powerful. After all a werewolf has only two–at most three–different forms while a doppler can transform into anything it wants to as long as the body mass more or less tallies.
Body mass?
Well he wont turn into a mastodon. Or a mouse.
I understand. And the chain youve bound him up in whats that about?
Its silver. Its lethal to a lycanthrope but as you see for a mimic it merely stops the transmutations. Thats why its sitting here in its own form.
The doppler pursed its glutinous lips and glowered at the Witcher with an evil expression in its dull eyes which had already lost the hazel colour of the halflings irises and were now yellow.
Im glad its sitting cheeky bastard Dainty snarled. Just to think it even stopped here at the Blade where I customarily lodge! It already thinks its me!
Dandelion nodded.
Dainty he said It was you. Ive been meeting it here for three days now. It looked like you and spoke like you. And when it came to standing a round it was as tight as you. Possibly even tighter.
That last point doesnt worry me the halfling said because perhaps Ill recover some of my money. It disgusts me to touch it. Take the purse off it Dandelion and check whats inside. There ought to be plenty if that horse thief really did sell my nags.
How many horses did you have Dainty?
A dozen.
Calculating according to world prices the troubadour said looking into the purse whats here would just about buy a single horse if you chanced upon an old foundered one. Calculating according to Novigradian prices theres enough for two goats three at most.
The merchant said nothing but looked as though he were about to cry. Tellico Lunngrevink Letorte hung his nose down low and his lower lip even lower after which he began to softly gurgle.
In a word the halfling finally sighed Ive been robbed and ruined by a creature whose existence I previously didnt believe in. Thats what you call bad luck.
That about sums it up the Witcher said casting a glance at the doppler huddled on the stool. I was also convinced that mimics had been wiped out long ago. In the past so Ive heard plenty of them used to live in the nearby forests and on the plateau. But their ability to mimic seriously worried the first settlers and they began to hunt them. Quite effectively. Almost all of them were quickly exterminated.
And lucky for us the innkeeper said spitting onto the floor. I swear on the Eternal Fire I prefer a dragon or a demon which is always a dragon or a demon. You know where you are with them. But werewolfery all those transmutations and metamorphoses that hideous demonic practice trickery and the treacherous deceit conjured up by those hideous creatures will be the detriment and undoing of people! I tell you lets call the guard and into the fire with this repugnance!
Geralt? Dandelion asked curiously. Id be glad to hear an experts opinion. Are these mimics really so dangerous and aggressive?
Their ability to mimic the Witcher said is an attribute which serves as defence rather than aggression. I havent heard of—
A pox on it Dainty interrupted angrily slamming his fist down on the table. If thumping a fellow in the head and plundering him isnt aggression I dont know what it is. Stop being clever. The matter is simple; I was waylaid and robbed not just of my hard-earned property but also of my own form. I demand compensation and I shall not rest—
The guard we must call the guard the innkeeper said. And we should summon the priests! And burn that monster that non-human!
Give over landlord the halfling said raising his head. Youre becoming a bore with that guard of yours. I would like to point out that that non-human hasnt harmed anybody else only me. And incidentally Im also a non-human.
Dont be ridiculous Mr Biberveldt the innkeeper laughed nervously. What are you and what is that? Youre not far off being a man and thats a monster. It astonishes me that youre sitting there so calmly Witcher sir. Whats your trade if youll pardon me? Its your job to kill monsters isnt it?
Monsters Geralt said coldly but not the members of intelligent races.
Come come sir the innkeeper said. Thats a bit of an exaggeration.
Indeed Dandelion cut in youve overstepped the mark Geralt with that intelligent race. Just take a look at it.
Tellico Lunngrevink Letorte indeed did not resemble a member of an intelligent race at that moment. He resembled a puppet made of mud and flour looking at the Witcher with a beseeching look in its dull yellow eyes. Neither were the snuffling sounds being emitted from its nose–which now reached the table–consistent with a member of an intelligent race.
Enough of this empty bullshit! Dainty Biberveldt suddenly roared. Theres nothing to argue about! The only thing that counts is my horses and my loss! Do you hear you bloody slippery jack you? Who did you sell my nags to? What did you do with the money? Tell me now before I kick you black and blue and flay you alive!
Detchka opening the door slightly stuck her flaxen-haired head into the chamber.
We have visitors father she whispered. Journeymen masons from the scaffolding and others. Im serving them but dont shout so loudly in here because theyre beginning to look funny at the snug.
By the Eternal Fire! the innkeeper said in horror looking at the molten doppler. If someone looks in and sees it… Oh itll look bad. If we arent to call the guard then… Witcher sir! If it really is a vexling tell it to change into something decent as a disguise like. Just for now.
Thats right Dainty said. Have him change into something Geralt.
Into whom? the doppler suddenly gurgled. I can only take on a form Ive had a good look at. Which of you shall I turn into?
Not me the innkeeper said hurriedly.
Nor me Dandelion snorted. Anyway it wouldnt be any disguise. Everybody knows me so the sight of two Dandelions at one table would cause a bigger sensation than the one here in person.
It would be the same with me Geralt smiled. That leaves you Dainty. And its turned out well. Dont be offended but you know yourself that people have difficulty distinguishing one halfling from another.
The merchant did not ponder this for long.
Very well he said. Let it be. Take the chain off him Witcher. Right then turn yourself into me O intelligent race.
After the chain had been removed the doppler rubbed its doughy hands together felt its nose and stared goggle-eyed at the halfling. The sagging skin on its face tightened up and acquired colour. Its nose shrank and drew in with a dull squelching sound and curly hair sprouted on its bald pate. Now it was Daintys turn to goggle the innkeeper opened his mouth in mute astonishment and Dandelion heaved a sigh and groaned.
The last thing to change was the colour of its eyes.
The second Dainty Biberveldt cleared its throat reached across the table seized the first Dainty Biberveldts beer mug and greedily pressed its mouth to it.
It cant be it cant be Dandelion said softly. Just look hes been copied exactly. Theyre indistinguishable. Down to the last detail. This time even the mosquito bites and stains on its britches… Yes on its britches! Geralt not even sorcerers can manage that! Feel it its real wool thats no illusion! Extraordinary! How does it do it?
No one knows the Witcher muttered. It doesnt either. I said it has the complete ability for the free transformation of material structure but it is an organic instinctive ability…
But the britches… What has it made the britches out of? And the waistcoat?
Thats its own adapted skin. I dont think itd be happy to give up those trousers. Anyway theyd immediately lose the properties of wool—
Pity Dainty said showing cunning because I was just wondering whether to make it change a bucket of matter into a bucket of gold.
The doppler now a faithful copy of the halfling lounged comfortably and grinned broadly clearly glad to be the centre of interest. It was sitting in an identical pose to Dainty swinging its hairy feet the same way.
You know plenty about dopplers Geralt it said then took a swig from the mug smacked its lips and belched. Plenty indeed.
Ye Gods its voice and mannerisms are also Biberveldts Dandelion said. Havent any of you got a bit of red silk thread? We ought to mark it dammit because there might be trouble.
Come on Dandelion the first Dainty Biberveldt said indignantly. Surely you wont mistake it for me? The differences are clear at…
… first glance the second Dainty Biberveldt completed the sentence and belched again gracefully. Indeed in order to be mistaken youd have to be more stupid than a mares arse.
Didnt I say? Dandelion whispered in amazement. It thinks and talks like Biberveldt. Theyre indistinguishable…
An exaggeration the halfling said pouting. A gross exaggeration.
No Geralt rebutted. Its not an exaggeration. Believe it or not but at this moment it is you Dainty. In some unknown way the doppler also precisely copies its victims mentality.
Mental what?
The minds properties the character feelings thoughts. The soul. Which would confirm what most sorcerers and all priests would deny. That the soul is also matter.
Blasphemy! The innkeeper gasped.
And poppycock Dainty Biberveldt said firmly. Dont tell stories Witcher. The minds properties I like that. Copying someones nose and britches is one thing but someones mind is no bloody mean feat. Ill prove it to you now. If that lousy doppler had copied my merchants mind he wouldnt have sold the horses in Novigrad where theres no market for them; he would have ridden to the horse fair in Devils Ford where theyre sold to the highest bidder. You dont lose money there—
Well actually you do. The doppler imitated the halflings offended expression and snorted characteristically. First of all the prices at the auctions in Devils Ford are coming down because the merchants are fixing the bidding. And in addition you have to pay the auctioneers commission.
Dont teach me how to trade you prat Biberveldt said indignantly. I would have taken ninety or a hundred a piece in Devils Ford. And how much did you get off those Novigradian chancers?
A hundred and thirty the doppler replied.
Youre lying you rascal.
I am not. I drove the horses straight to the port sir and found a foreign fur trader. Furriers dont use oxen when they assemble their caravans because oxen are too slow. Furs are light but costly so one needs to travel swiftly. Theres no market for horses in Novigrad so neither are there any horses. I had the only available ones so I could name my price. Simple—
Dont teach me I said! Dainty yelled flushing red. Very well you made a killing. So wheres the money?
I reinvested it Tellico said proudly imitating the halflings typical raking of his fingers through his thick mop of hair. Money Mr Dainty has to circulate and business has to be kept moving.
Be careful I dont wring your neck! Tell me what you did with the cash you made on the horses.
I told you. I sank it into goods.
What goods? What did you buy you freak?
Co… cochineal the doppler stuttered and then enumerated quickly: A thousand bushels of cochineal sixty-two hundredweight of mimosa bark fifty-five gallons of rose oil twenty-three barrels of cod liver oil six hundred earthenware bowls and eighty pounds of beeswax. I bought the cod liver oil very cheaply incidentally because it was a little rancid. Oh yes I almost forgot. I also bought a hundred cubits of cotton string.
A long–very long–silence fell.
Cod liver oil Dainty finally said enunciating each word very slowly. Cotton string. Rose oil. I must be dreaming. Yes its a nightmare. You can buy anything in Novigrad every precious and everyday thing and this moron here spends my money on shit. Pretending to be me. Im finished my moneys lost my merchants reputation is lost. No Ive had enough of this. Lend me your sword Geralt. Ill cut him to shreds here and now.
The door to the chamber creaked open.
The merchant Biberveldt! crowed an individual in a purple toga which hung on his emaciated frame as though on a stick. He had a hat on his head shaped like an upturned chamber pot. Is the merchant Biberveldt here?
Yes the two halflings answered in unison.
The next moment one of the Dainty Biberveldts flung the contents of the mug in the Witchers face deftly kicked the stool from under Dandelion and slipped under the table towards the door knocking over the individual in the ridiculous hat on the way.
Fire! Help! it yelled rushing out towards the common chamber. Murder! Calamity!
Geralt shaking off the beer froth rushed after him but the second Biberveldt who was also tearing towards the door slipped on the sawdust and fell in front of him. The two of them fell over right on the threshold. Dandelion clambering out from under the table cursed hideously.
Assaaault! yelled the skinny individual entangled in his purple toga from the floor. Rooobberrrryyyy! Criminals!
Geralt rolled over the halfling and rushed into the main chamber to see the doppler–jostling the drinkers–running out into the street. He rushed after him only to run into a resilient but hard wall of men barring his way. He managed to knock one of them over smeared with clay and stinking of beer but others held him fast in the iron grip of powerful hands. He fought furiously but heard the dry report of snapping thread and rending leather and the sleeve become loose under his right armpit. The Witcher swore and stopped struggling.
We ave im! the masons yelled. Weve got the robber! What do we do now master?
Lime! the master bellowed raising his head from the table and looking around with unseeing eyes.
Guaaard! the purple one yelled crawling from the chamber on all fours. An official has been assaulted! Guard! It will be the gallows for you villain!
We ave im! the masons shouted. We ave im sir!
Thats not him! the individual in the toga bellowed Catch the scoundrel! After him!
Who?
Biberveldt the halfling! After him give chase! To the dungeons with him!
Hold on a moment Dainty said emerging from the snug. Whats it all about Mr Schwann? Dont drag my name through the mud. And dont sound the alarm theres no need.
Schwann was silent and looked at the halfling in astonishment. Dandelion emerged from the chamber bonnet at an angle examining his lute. The masons whispering among themselves finally released Geralt. The Witcher although absolutely furious limited himself to spitting copiously on the floor.
Merchant Biberveldt! Schwann crowed narrowing his myopic eyes. What is the meaning of this? An assault on a municipal official may cost you dearly… Who was that? That halfling who bolted?
My cousin Dainty said quickly. A distant cousin…
Yes yes Dandelion agreed swiftly backing him up and feeling in his element. Biberveldts distant cousin. Known as Nutcase-Biberveldt. The black sheep of the family. When he was a child he fell into a well. A dried-up well. But unfortunately the pail hit him directly on his head. Hes usually peaceful its just that the colour purple infuriates him. But theres nothing to worry about because hes calmed by the sight of red hairs on a ladys loins. Thats why he rushed straight to Passiflora. I tell you Mr Schwann—
Thats enough Dandelion the Witcher hissed. Shut up dammit.
Schwann pulled his toga down brushed the sawdust off it and straightened up assuming a haughty air.
Now then he said. Heed your relatives more attentively merchant Biberveldt because as you well know you are responsible. Were I to lodge a complaint… But I cannot afford the time. I am here Biberveldt on official business. On behalf of the municipal authorities I summon you to pay tax.
Eh?
Tax the official repeated and pouted his lips in a grimace probably copied from someone much more important. What are you doing? Been infected by your cousin? If you make a profit you have to pay taxes. Or youll have to do time in the dungeon.
Me? Dainty roared. Me make a profit? All I have is losses for fucks sake! I—
Careful Biberveldt the Witcher hissed while Dandelion kicked the halfling furtively in his hairy shin. The halfling coughed.
Of course he said struggling to put a smile on his chubby face of course Mr Schwann. If you make a profit you have to pay taxes. High profits high taxes. And the other way around Id say.
It is not for me to judge your business sir the official said making a sour face. He sat down at the table removing from the fathomless depths of his toga an abacus and a scroll of parchment which he unrolled on the table first wiping it with a sleeve. It is my job to count up and collect. Now then… Let us reckon this up… That will be… hmmm… Two down carry the one… Now then… one thousand five hundred and fifty-three crowns and twenty pennies.
A hushed wheeze escaped Dainty Biberveldts lips. The masons muttered in astonishment. The innkeeper dropped a bowl. Dandelion gasped.
Very well. Goodbye lads the halfling said bitterly. If anybody asks; Im in the dungeon.
II
By tomorrow at noon Dainty groaned. And that whoreson that Schwann damn him the repulsive creep could have extended it. Over fifteen hundred crowns. How am I to come by that kind of coin by tomorrow? Im finished ruined Ill rot in the dungeons! Dont lets sit here dammit lets catch that bastard doppler I tell you! We have to catch it!
The three of them were sitting on the marble sill of a disused fountain occupying the centre of a small square among sumptuous but extremely tasteless merchants townhouses. The water in the fountain was green and dreadfully dirty and the golden ides swimming among the refuse worked their gills hard and gulped in air from the surface through open mouths. Dandelion and the halfling were chewing some fritters which the troubadour had swiped from a stall they had just passed.
In your shoes the bard said Id forget about catching it and start looking around for somebody to borrow the money off. What will you get from catching the doppler? Perhaps you think Schwann will accept it as an equivalent?
Youre a fool Dandelion. When I catch the doppler Ill get my money back.
What money? Everything he had in that purse went on covering the damage and a bribe for Schwann. It didnt have any more.
Dandelion the halfling grimaced. You may know something about poetry but in business matters forgive me youre a total blockhead. Did you hear how much tax Schwann is charging me? And what do you pay tax on? Hey? On what?
On everything the poet stated. I even pay tax on singing. And they dont give a monkeys about my explanations that I was only singing from an inner need.
Youre a fool I said. In business you pay taxes on profits. On profits. Dandelion! Do you comprehend? That rascal of a doppler impersonated me and made some business transactions–fraudulent ones no doubt. And made money on them! It made a profit! And Ill have to pay tax and probably cover the debts of that scoundrel if it has run up any debts! And if I dont pay it off Im going to the dungeons theyll brand me with a red-hot iron in public and send me to the mines! A pox on it!
Ha Dandelion said cheerfully. So you dont have a choice Dainty. Youll have to flee the city in secret. Know what? I have an idea. Well wrap you up in a sheepskin. You can pass through the gate calling: Im a little baa-lamb baa baa. No one will recognise you.
Dandelion the halfling said glumly. Shut up or Ill kick you. Geralt?
What Dainty?
Will you help me catch the doppler?
Listen the Witcher said still trying in vain to sew up his torn jacket sleeve this is Novigrad. A population of thirty thousand: humans dwarves half-elves halflings and gnomes and probably as many out-of-towners again. How do you mean to find someone in this rabbit warren?
Dainty swallowed a fritter and licked his fingers.
And magic Geralt? Those witcher spells of yours about which so many tales circulate?
A doppler is only magically detectable in its own form and it doesnt walk down the street in it. And even if it did magic would be no use because there are plenty of weak sorcerers signals all around. Every second house has a magical lock on the door and three quarters of the people wear amulets of all kinds: against thieves fleas and food poisoning. Too many to count.
Dandelion ran his fingers over the lutes fingerboard and strummed the strings.
Spring will return with warm rain perfumed! he sang. No thats no good. Spring will return the sun—No dammit. Its just not coming. Not at all…
Stop squawking the halfling snapped. Youre getting on my nerves.
Dandelion threw the ides the rest of his fritter and spat into the fountain.
Look he said. Golden fish. Its said that they grant wishes.
Those ones are red Dainty observed.
Never mind its a trifle. Dammit there are three of us and they grant three wishes. That works out at one each. What Dainty? Wouldnt you wish for the fish to pay the tax for you?
Of course. And apart from that for something to fall from the sky and whack the doppler on the noggin. And also—
Stop stop. We also have our wishes. Id like the fish to supply me with an ending for my ballad. And you Geralt?
Get off my back Dandelion.
Dont spoil the game Witcher. Tell us what youd wish for.
The Witcher got up.
I would wish he murmured that the fact were being surrounded would turn out to be a misunderstanding.
From an alleyway opposite the fountain emerged four individuals dressed in black wearing round leather caps heading slowly towards them. Dainty swore softly and looked around.
Another four men came out of a street behind their backs. They did not come any closer and having positioned themselves stood blocking the street. They were holding strange looking discs resembling coiled ropes. The Witcher looked around and moved his shoulders adjusting the sword slung across his back. Dandelion groaned.
From behind the backs of the individuals in black emerged a small man in a white kaftan and a short grey cape. The gold chain on his neck sparkled to the rhythm of his steps flashing yellow.
Chappelle… Dandelion groaned. Its Chappelle…
The individuals in black behind them moved slowly towards the fountain. The Witcher reached for his sword.
No Geralt Dandelion whispered moving closer to him. For the Gods sake dont draw your weapon. Its the temple guard. If we resist we wont leave Novigrad alive. Dont touch your sword.
The man in the white kaftan walked swiftly towards them. The individuals in black followed him surrounding the fountain at a march and occupied strategic carefully chosen positions. Geralt observed them vigilantly crouching slightly. The strange discs they were holding were not–as he had first thought–ordinary whips. They were lamias.
The man in the white kaftan approached them.
Geralt the bard whispered. By all the Gods keep calm—
I wont let them touch me the Witcher muttered. I wont let them touch me whoever they are. Be careful Dandelion… When it starts you two flee as fast as you can. Ill keep them busy… for some time…
Dandelion did not answer. Slinging the lute over one shoulder he bowed low before the man in the white kaftan which was ornately embroidered with gold and silver threads in an intricate mosaic pattern.
Venerable Chappelle…
The man addressed as Chappelle stopped and swept them with his gaze. His eyes Geralt noticed were frost-cold and the colour of steel. His forehead was pale beaded unhealthily with sweat and his cheeks were flushed with irregular red blotches.
Mr Dainty Biberveldt merchant he said. The talented Dandelion. And Geralt of Rivia a representative of the oh-so rare witchers profession. A reunion of old friends? Here in Novigrad?
None of them answered.
I consider it highly regrettable Chappelle continued that a report has been submitted about you.
Dandelion blanched slightly and the halflings teeth chattered. The Witcher was not looking at Chappelle. He did not take his eyes off the weapons of the men in leather caps surrounding the fountain. In most of the countries known to Geralt the production and possession of spiked lamias also called Mayhenian scourges were strictly prohibited. Novigrad was no exception. Geralt had seen people struck in the face by a lamia. He would never forget those faces.
The keeper of the Spear Blade inn Chappelle continued had the audacity to accuse you gentlemen of collusion with a demon a monster known as a changeling or a vexling.
None of them answered. Chappelle folded his arms on his chest and looked at them coldly.
I felt obliged to forewarn you of that report. I shall also inform you that the above-mentioned innkeeper has been imprisoned in the dungeons. There is a suspicion that he was raving under the influence of beer or vodka. Astonishing what people will concoct. Firstly there are no such things as vexlings. It is a fabrication of superstitious peasants.
No one commented on this.
Secondly what vexling would dare to approach a witcher Chappelle smiled and not be killed at once? Am I right? The innkeepers accusation would thus be ludicrous were it not for one vital detail.
Chappelle nodded pausing dramatically. The Witcher heard Dainty slowly exhaling a large lungful of air.
Yes a certain vital detail Chappelle repeated. Namely we are facing heresy and sacrilegious blasphemy here. For it is a well-known fact that no vexling absolutely no vexling nor any other monster could even approach the walls of Novigrad because here in nineteen temples burns the Eternal Fire whose sacred power protects the city. Whoever says that he saw a vexling at the Spear Blade a stones throw from the chief altar of the Eternal Fire is a blasphemous heretic and will have to retract his claim. Should he not want to he shall be assisted by the power and means which trust me I keep close at hand in the dungeons. Thus as you can see there is nothing to be concerned about.
The expressions on the faces of Dandelion and the halfling showed emphatically that they both thought differently.
There is absolutely nothing to be concerned about Chappelle repeated. You may leave Novigrad without let or hindrance. I will not detain you. I do have to insist gentlemen however that you do not broadcast the lamentable fabrications of the innkeeper that you do not discuss this incident openly. Statements calling into question the divine power of the Eternal Fire irrespective of the intention we the humble servants of the temple would have to treat as heresy with all due consequences. Your personal religious convictions whatever they might be and however I respect them are of no significance. Believe in what you will. I am tolerant while somebody venerates the Eternal Fire and does not blaspheme against it. But should they blaspheme I shall order them burnt at the stake and that is that. Everybody in Novigrad is equal before the law. And the law applies equally to everybody; anyone who blasphemes against the Eternal Fire perishes at the stake and their property is confiscate. But enough of that. I repeat; you may pass through the gates of Novigrad without hindrance. Ideally…
Chappelle smiled slightly sucked in his cheeks in a cunning grimace and his eyes swept the square. The few passers-by observing the incident quickened their step and rapidly turned their heads away.
… ideally Chappelle finished ideally with immediate effect. Forthwith. Obviously with regard to the honourable merchant Biberveldt that forthwith means forthwith having settled all fiscal affairs. Thank you for the time you have given me.
Dainty turned away mouth moving noiselessly. The Witcher had no doubt that the noiseless word had been whoreson. Dandelion lowered his head smiling foolishly.
My dear Witcher Chappelle suddenly said a word in private if you would.
Geralt approached and Chappelle gently extended an arm. If he touches my elbow Ill strike him the Witcher thought. Ill strike him whatever happens.
Chappelle did not touch Geralts elbow.
My dear Witcher he said quietly turning his back on the others I am aware that some cities unlike Novigrad are deprived of the divine protection of the Eternal Fire. Let us then suppose that a creature similar to a vexling was prowling in one of those cities. I wonder how much you would charge in that case for undertaking to catch a vexling alive?
I dont hire myself out to hunt monsters in crowded cities the Witcher shrugged. An innocent bystander might suffer harm.
Are you so concerned about the fate of innocent bystanders?
Yes I am. Because I am usually held responsible for their fate. And have to cope with the consequences.
I understand. And would not your concern for the fate of innocent bystanders be in inverse proportion to the fee?
It would not.
I do not greatly like your tone Witcher. But no matter I understand what you hint at by it. You are hinting that you do not want to do… what I would ask you to do making the size of the fee meaningless. And the form of the fee?
I do not understand.
Come come.
I mean it.
Purely theoretically Chappelle said quietly calmly without any anger or menace in his voice it might be possible that the fee for your services would be a guarantee that you and your friends would leave this—leave the theoretical city alive. What then?
It is impossible the Witcher said smiling hideously to answer that question theoretically. The situation you are discussing Reverend Chappelle would have to be dealt with in practice. I am in no hurry to do so but if the necessity arises… If there proves to be no other choice… I am prepared to go through with it.
Ha perhaps you are right Chappelle answered dispassionately. Too much theory. As concerns practice I see that there will be no collaboration. A good thing perhaps? In any case I cherish the hope that it will not be a cause for conflict between us.
I also cherish that hope.
Then may that hope burn in us Geralt of Rivia. Do you know what the Eternal Fire is? A flame that never goes out a symbol of permanence a way leading through the gloom a harbinger of progress of a better tomorrow. The Eternal Fire Geralt is hope. For everybody everybody without exception. For if something exists that embraces us all… you me… others… then that something is precisely hope. Remember that. It was a pleasure to meet you Witcher.
Geralt bowed stiffly saying nothing. Chappelle looked at him for a moment then turned about energetically and marched through the small square without looking around at his escort. The men armed with the lamias fell in behind him forming up into a well-ordered column.
Oh mother of mine Dandelion whimpered timidly watching the departing men but we were lucky. If that is the end of it. If they dont collar us right away—
Calm down the Witcher said and stop whining. Nothing happened after all.
Do you know who that was Geralt?
No.
That was Chappelle minister for security affairs. The Novigrad secret service is subordinate to the temple. Chappelle is not a priest but the eminence grise to the hierarch the most powerful and most dangerous man in the city. Everybody even the Council and the guilds shake in their shoes before him because hes a first-rate bastard Geralt drunk on power like a spider drunk on flys blood. Its common knowledge–though not discussed openly in the city–what hes capable of. People vanishing without trace. Falsified accusations torture assassinations terror blackmail and plain plunder. Extortion swindles and fraud. By the Gods youve landed us in a pretty mess Biberveldt.
Give it a rest Dandelion Dainty snapped. Its not that you have to be afraid of anything. No one ever touches a troubadour. For unfathomable reasons you are inviolable.
In Novigrad Dandelion whined still pale an inviolable poet may still fall beneath a speeding wagon be fatally poisoned by a fish or accidentally drown in a moat. Chappelle specialises in mishaps of that nature. I consider the fact that he talked to us at all something exceptional. One thing is certain he didnt do it without a reason. Hes up to something. Youll see theyll soon embroil us in something clap us in irons and drag us off to be tortured with the sanction of the law. Thats how things are done here!
There is quite some truth the halfling said to Geralt in what he says. We must watch out. Its astonishing that that scoundrel Chappelle hasnt keeled over yet. For years theyve been saying hes sick that his heart will give out and everybodys waiting for him to croak…
Be quiet Biberveldt the troubadour hissed apprehensively looking around because somebodys bound to be listening. Look how everybodys staring at us. Lets get out of here Im telling you. And I suggest we treat seriously what Chappelle told us about the doppler. I for example have never seen a doppler in my life and if it comes to it Ill swear as much before the Eternal Fire.
Look the halfling suddenly said. Somebody is running towards us.
Lets flee! Dandelion howled.
Calm yourself calm yourself Dainty grinned and combed his mop of hair with his fingers. I know him. Its Muskrat a local merchant the Guilds treasurer. Weve done business together. Hey look at the expression on his face! As though hes shat his britches. Hey Muskrat are you looking for me?
I swear by the Eternal Fire Muskrat panted pushing back a fox fur cap and wiping his forehead with his sleeve I was certain theyd drag you off to the barbican. Its truly a miracle. Im astonished—
Its nice of you the halfling sneeringly interrupted to be astonished. Youll delight us even more if you tell us why.
Dont play dumb Biberveldt Muskrat frowned. The whole city already knows the profit you made on the cochineal. Everybodys talking about it already and it has clearly reached the hierarch and Chappelle. How cunning you are how craftily you benefited from what happened in Poviss.
What are you blathering about Muskrat?
Ye Gods would you stop trying to play the innocent Dainty? Did you buy that cochineal? For a song at ten-forty a bushel? Yes you did. Taking advantage of the meagre demand you paid with a backed bill without paying out a penny of cash. And what happened? In the course of a day you palmed off the entire cargo at four times the price for cash on the table. Perhaps youll have the cheek to say it was an accident a stroke of luck? That when buying the cochineal you knew nothing about the coup in Poviss?
The what? What are you talking about?
There was a coup in Poviss! Muskrat yelled. And one of those you know… levorutions! King Rhyd was overthrown and now the Thyssenid clan is in power! Rhyds court the nobility and the army wore blue and the weaving mills there only bought indigo. But the colour of the Thyssenids is scarlet so the price of indigo went down and cochineals gone up and then it came out that you Biberveldt had the only available cargo in your grasp! Ha!
Dainty fell silent and looked distressed.
Crafty Biberveldt must be said Muskrat continued. And you didnt tell anybody anything not even your friends. If youd let on we might both have made a profit might even have set up a joint factory. But you preferred to act alone softly-softly. Your choice; but dont count on me any longer either. On the Eternal Fire its true that every halfling is a selfish bastard and a whoreson. Vimme Vivaldi never gives me a backed bill; and you? On the spot. Because youre one tribe you damned inhumans you poxy halflings and dwarves. Damn the lot of you!
Muskrat spat turned on his heel and walked off. Dainty lost in thought scratched his head until his mop of hair crunched.
Somethings dawning on me boys he said at last. Now I know what needs to be done. Lets go to the bank. If anyone can make head or tail of all this that someone is the banker friend of mine Vimme Vivaldi.
III
I imagined the bank differently Dandelion whispered looking around the room. Where do they keep the money Geralt?
The Devil only knows the Witcher answered quietly hiding his torn jacket sleeve. In the cellars perhaps?
Not a chance. Ive had a look around. There arent any cellars here.
They must keep it in the loft then.
Would you come to my office gentlemen? Vimme Vivaldi asked.
Young men and dwarves of indiscernible age sitting at long tables were busy covering sheets of parchment with columns of figures and letters. All of them–without exception–were hunched over with the tips of their tongues sticking out. The work the Witcher judged was fiendishly monotonous but seemed to preoccupy the staff utterly. In the corner on a low stool sat an elderly beggarly-looking man busy sharpening quills. He was making hard work of it.
The banker carefully closed the door to the office stroked his long white well-groomed beard spotted here and there with ink and straightened a claret-coloured velvet jerkin stretched over a prominent belly.
You know Dandelion sir he said sitting down at an enormous mahogany table piled with parchments I imagined you quite differently. And I know your songs I know them Ive heard them. About Princess Vanda who drowned in the River Duppie because no one wanted her. And about the kingfisher that fell into a privy—
They arent mine Dandelion flushed in fury. Ive never written anything like that!
Ah. Im sorry then.
Perhaps we could get to the point? Dainty cut in. Time is short and youre talking nonsense. Im in grave difficulties Vimme.
I was afraid of that the dwarf nodded. As you recall I warned you Biberveldt. I told you three days ago not to sink any resources into that rancid cod liver oil. What if it was cheap? It is not the nominal price that is important but the size of the profit on resale. The same applies to the rose oil and the wax and those earthenware bowls. What possessed you Dainty to buy that shit and in hard cash to boot rather than judiciously pay with a letter of credit or by draft? I told you that storage costs in Novigrad are devilishly high; in the course of two weeks they will surpass the value of those goods threefold. But you—
Yes the halfling quietly groaned. Tell me Vivaldi. What did I do?
But you told me not to worry that you would sell everything in the course of twenty-four hours. And now you come and declare that you are in trouble smiling foolishly and disarmingly all the while. But its not selling is it? And costs are rising what? Ha thats not good not good. How am I to get you out of it Dainty? Had you at least insured that junk I would have sent one of the clerks at once to quietly torch the store. No my dear the only thing to be done is to approach the matter philosophically and say to oneself: Fuck this for a game of soldiers. This is business; you win some you lose some. What kind of profit was it anyway that cod liver oil wax and rose oil? Risible. Let us talk about serious business. Tell me if I should sell the mimosa bark yet because the offers have begun to stabilise at five and five-sixths.
Hey?
Are you deaf? the banker frowned. The last offer was exactly five and five-sixths. You came back I hope to close the deal? You wont get seven anyhow Dainty.
I came back?
Vivaldi stroked his beard and picked some crumbs of fruit cake from it.
You were here an hour since he said calmly with instructions to hold out for seven. A sevenfold increase on the price you paid is two crowns five-and-forty pennies a pound. That is too high Dainty even for such a perfectly timed market. The tanneries will already have reached agreement and they will solidly stick to the price. Im absolutely certain—
The door to the office opened and something in a green felt cap and a coat of dappled coney fur girded with hempen twine rushed in.
Merchant Sulimir is offering two crowns fifteen! it squealed.
Six and one-sixth Vivaldi swiftly calculated. What do we do Dainty?
Sell! the halfling yelled. A six-fold profit and youre still bloody wondering?
Another something in a yellow cap and a mantle resembling an old sack dashed into the office. Like the first something it was about two cubits tall.
Merchant Biberveldt instructs not to sell for below seven! it shouted wiped its nose on its sleeve and ran out.
Aha the dwarf said after a long silence. One Biberveldt orders us to sell and another Biberveldt orders us to wait. An interesting situation. What do we do Dainty? Do you set about explaining at once or do we wait until a third Biberveldt orders us to load the bark onto galleys and ship it to the Land of the Cynocephali? Hey?
What is that? Dandelion stammered pointing at the something in a green cap still standing in the doorway. What the bloody hell is it?
A young gnome Geralt said.
Undoubtedly Vivaldi confirmed coldly. It is not an old troll. Anyway its not important what it is. Very well Dainty if you please.
Vimme the halfling said. If you dont mind. Dont ask questions. Something awful has happened. Just accept that I Dainty Biberveldt of Knotgrass Meadow an honest merchant do not have a clue whats happening. Tell me everything in detail. The events of the last three days. Please Vimme.
Curious the dwarf said. Well for the commission I take I have to grant the wishes of the client whatever they might be. So listen. You came rushing in here three days ago out of breath gave me a deposit of a thousand crowns and demanded an endorsement on a bill amounting to two thousand five hundred and twenty to the bearer. I gave you that endorsement.
Without a guaranty?
Correct. I like you Dainty.
Go on Vimme.
The next day you rushed in with a bang and a clatter demanding that I issue a letter of credit on a bank in Vizima. For the considerable sum of three thousand five hundred crowns. The beneficiary was to be if I remember rightly a certain Ther Lukokian alias Truffle. Well I issued that letter of credit.
Without a guaranty the halfling said hopefully.
My affection for you Biberveldt the banker said ceases at around three thousand crowns. This time I took from you a written obligation that in the event of insolvency the mill would be mine.
What mill?
That of your father-in-law Arno Hardbottom in Knotgrass Meadow.
Im not going home Dainty declared glumly but determinedly. Ill sign on to a ship and become a pirate.
Vimme Vivaldi scratched an ear and looked at him suspiciously.
Oh come on he said you took that obligation and tore it up almost right away. You are solvent. No small wonder with profits like that—
Profits?
Thats right I forgot muttered the dwarf. I was meant not to be surprised by anything. You made a good profit on the cochineal Biberveldt. Because you see there was a coup in Poviss—
I already know the dwarf interrupted. Indigos gone down and cochineals gone up. And I made a profit. Is that true Vimme?
Yes it is. You have in my safe keeping six thousand three hundred and forty-six crowns and eighty pennies. Net after deducting my commission and tax.
You paid the tax for me?
What else would I do? Vivaldi said in astonishment. After all you were here an hour ago and told me to pay it. The clerk has already delivered the entire sum to city hall. Something around fifteen hundred because the sale of the horses was of course included in it.
The door opened with a bang and something in a very dirty cap came running in.
Two crowns thirty! it shouted. Merchant Hazelquist!
Dont sell! Dainty called. Well wait for a better price! Be gone back to the market with the both of you!
The two gnomes caught some coppers thrown to them by the dwarf and disappeared.
Right… Where was I? Vivaldi wondered playing with a huge strangely-formed amethyst crystal serving as a paperweight. Aha with the cochineal bought with a bill of exchange. And you needed the letter of credit I mentioned to purchase a large cargo of mimosa bark. You bought a deal of it but quite cheaply for thirty-five pennies a pound from a Zangwebarian factor that Truffle or perhaps Morel. The galley sailed into port yesterday. And then it all began.
I can imagine Dainty groaned.
What is mimosa bark needed for? Dandelion blurted out.
Nothing the halfling muttered dismally. Unfortunately.
Mimosa bark poet sir the dwarf explained is an agent used for tanning hides.
If somebody was so stupid Dainty interrupted as to buy mimosa bark from beyond the seas when oak bark can be bought in Temeria for next to nothing…
And here is the nub of the matter Vivaldi said because in Temeria the druids have just announced that if the destruction of oaks is not stopped immediately they will afflict the land with a plague of hornets and rats. The druids are being supported by the dryads and the king there is fond of dryads. In short: since yesterday there has been a total embargo on Temerian oak for which reason mimosa is going up. Your information was accurate Dainty.
A stamping was heard from the chambers beyond the room and then the something in a green cap came running into the office out of breath.
The honourable merchant Sulimir… the gnome panted has instructed me to repeat that merchant Biberveldt the halfling is a reckless bristly swine a profiteer and charlatan and that he Sulimir hopes that Biberveldt gets the mange. Hell give two crowns forty-four and that is his last word.
Sell the halfling blurted out. Go on shorty run off and accept it. Count it up Vimme.
Vivaldi reached beneath some scrolls of parchment and took out a dwarven abacus a veritable marvel. Unlike abacuses used by humans the dwarven one was shaped like a small openwork pyramid. Vivaldis abacus though was made of gold wires over which slid angular beads of ruby emerald onyx and black agate which fitted into each other. The dwarf slid the gemstones upwards downwards and sideways for some time with quick deft movements of his plump finger.
That will be… hmm hmm… Minus the costs and my commission… Minus tax… Yes. Fifteen thousand six hundred and twenty-two crowns and five-and-twenty pennies. Not bad.
If Ive reckoned correctly Dainty Biberveldt said slowly all together net then I ought to have in my account…
Precisely twenty-one thousand nine hundred and sixty-nine crowns and five pennies. Not bad.
Not bad? Dandelion roared. Not bad? You could buy a large village or a small castle for that! Ive never ever seen that much money at one time!
I havent either the halfling said. But simmer down Dandelion. It so happens that no one has seen that money yet and it isnt certain if anyone ever will.
Hey Biberveldt the dwarf snorted. Why such gloomy thoughts? Sulimir will pay in cash or by a bill of exchange and Sulimirs bills are reliable. What then is the matter? Are you afraid of losing on that stinking cod liver oil and wax? With profits like that youll cover the losses with ease…
Thats not the point.
So what is the point?
Dainty coughed and lowered his curly mop.
Vimme he said eyes fixed on the floor. Chappelle is snooping around me.
The banker clicked his tongue.
Very bad he drawled. But it was to be expected. You see Biberveldt the information you used when carrying out the transactions does not just have commercial significance but also political. No one knew what was happening in Poviss and Temeria–Chappelle included–and Chappelle likes to be the first to know. So now as you can imagine he is wracking his brains about how you knew. And I think he has guessed. Because I think Ive also worked it out.
Thats fascinating.
Vivaldi swept his eyes over Dandelion and Geralt and wrinkled his snub nose.
Fascinating? Ill tell you whats fascinating; your party Dainty he said. A troubadour a witcher and a merchant. Congratulations. Master Dandelion shows up here and there even at royal courts and no doubt keeps his ears open. And the Witcher? A bodyguard? Someone to frighten debtors?
Hasty conclusions Mr Vivaldi Geralt said coldly. We are not partners.
And I Dandelion said flushing do not eavesdrop anywhere. Im a poet not a spy!
People say all sorts of things the dwarf grimaced. All sorts of things Master Dandelion.
Lies! the troubadour yelled. Damned lies!
Very well I believe you I believe you. I just dont know if Chappelle will believe it. But who knows perhaps it will all blow over. I tell you Biberveldt that Chappelle has changed a lot since his last attack of apoplexy. Perhaps the fear of death looked him in the arse and forced him to think things over? I swear he is not the same Chappelle. He seems to have become courteous rational composed and… and somehow honest.
Get away the halfling said. Chappelle honest? Courteous? Impossible.
Im telling you how it is Vivaldi replied. And how it is is what Im telling you. What is more now the temple is facing another problem: namely the Eternal Fire.
What do you mean?
The Eternal Fire as its known is supposed to burn everywhere. Altars dedicated to that fire are going to be built everywhere all over the city. A huge number of altars. Dont ask me for details Dainty I am not very familiar with human superstitions. But I know that all the priests and Chappelle also are concerned about almost nothing else but those altars and that fire. Great preparations are being made. Taxes will be going up that is certain.
Yes Dainty said. Cold comfort but—
The door to the office opened again and the Witcher recognised the something in a green cap and coney fur coat.
Merchant Biberveldt it announced instructs to buy more pots should they run out. Price no object.
Excellent the halfling smiled and his smile called to mind the twisted face of a furious wildcat. We will buy huge quantities of pots; Mr Biberveldts wish is our command. What else shall we buy more of? Cabbage? Wood tar? Iron rakes?
Furthermore the something in the fur coat croaked merchant Biberveldt requests thirty crowns in cash because he has to pay a bribe eat something and drink some beer and three miscreants stole his purse in the Spear Blade.
Oh. Three miscreants Dainty said in a slow drawling voice. Yes this city seems to be full of miscreants. And where if one may ask is the Honourable Merchant Biberveldt at this very moment?
Where else would he be the something said sniffing than at the Western Market?
Vimme Dainty said malevolently dont ask questions but find me a stout robust stick from somewhere. Im going to the Western Market but I cant go without a stick. There are too many miscreants and thieves there.
A stick you say? Of course. But Dainty Id like to know something because it is preying on me. I was supposed not to ask any questions but I shall make a guess and you can either confirm or deny it. All right?
Guess away.
That rancid cod liver oil that oil that wax and those bowls that bloody twine it was all a tactical gambit wasnt it? You wanted to distract the competitions attention from the cochineal and the mimosa didnt you? To stir up confusion on the market? Hey Dainty?
The door opened suddenly and something without a cap ran in.
Sorrel reports that everything is ready! it yelled shrilly. And asks if he should start pouring.
Yes he should! the halfling bellowed. At once!
By the red beard of old Rhundurin! Vimme Vivaldi bellowed as soon as the gnome had shut the door. I dont understand anything! What is happening here? Pour what? Into what?
I have no idea Dainty admitted. But Vimme the wheels of business must be oiled.
IV
Pushing through the crowd with difficulty Geralt emerged right in front of a stall laden with copper skillets pots and frying pans sparkling in the rays of the twilight sun. Behind the stall stood a red-bearded dwarf in an olive-green hood and heavy sealskin boots. The dwarfs face bore an expression of visible dislike; to be precise he looked as though any moment he intended to spit on the female customer sifting through the goods. The customers breast was heaving she was shaking her golden curls and was besetting the dwarf with a ceaseless and chaotic flow of words.
The customer was none other than Vespula known to Geralt as the thrower of missiles. Without waiting for her to recognise him he melted swiftly back into the crowd.
The Western Market was bustling with life and getting through the crowd was like forcing ones way through a hawthorn bush. Every now and then something caught on his sleeves and trouser legs; at times it was children who had lost their mothers while they were dragging their fathers away from the beer tent at others it was spies from the guardhouse at others shady vendors of caps of invisibility aphrodisiacs and bawdy scenes carved in cedar wood. Geralt stopped smiling and began to swear making judicious use of his elbows.
He heard the sound of a lute and a familiar peal of laughter. The sounds drifted from a fabulously coloured stall decorated with the sign: Buy your wonders amulets and fish bait here.
Has anyone ever told you madam that you are gorgeous? Dandelion yelled sitting on the stall and waving his legs cheerfully. No? It cannot be possible! This is a city of blind men nothing but a city of blind men. Come good folk! Who would hear a ballad of love? Whoever would be moved and enriched spiritually let him toss a coin into the hat. What are you shoving your way in for you bastard? Keep your pennies for beggars and dont insult an artist like me with copper. Perhaps I could forgive you but art never could!
Dandelion Geralt said approaching. I thought we had split up to search for the doppler. And youre giving concerts. Arent you ashamed to sing at markets like an old beggar?
Ashamed? the bard said astonished. What matters is what and how one sings and not where. Besides Im hungry and the stall-holder promised me lunch. As far as the doppler is concerned look for it yourselves. Im not cut out for chases brawls or mob law. Im a poet.
You would do better not to attract attention O poet. Your fiancée is here. There could be trouble.
Fiancée? Dandelion blinked nervously. Which one do you mean? I have several.
Vespula clutching a copper frying pan had forced her way through the audience with the momentum of a charging aurochs. Dandelion jumped up from the stall and darted away nimbly leaping over some baskets of carrots. Vespula turned towards the Witcher dilating her nostrils. Geralt stepped backwards his back coming up against the hard resistance of the stalls wall.
Geralt! Dainty Biberveldt shouted jumping from the crowd and bumping into Vespula. Quickly quickly! Ive seen him! Look there hes getting away!
Ill get you yet you lechers! Vespula screamed trying to regain her balance. Ill catch up with the whole of your debauched gang! A fine company! A pheasant a scruff and a midget with hairy heels! Youll be sorry!
This way Geralt! Dainty yelled as he ran jostling a small group of schoolboys intently playing the shell game. There there hes scarpered between those wagons! Steal up on him from the left! Quick!
They rushed off in pursuit the curses of the stallholders and customers they had knocked over ringing in their ears. By a miracle Geralt avoided tripping over a snot-nosed tot caught up in his legs. He jumped over it but knocked over two barrels of herrings for which an enraged fisherman lashed him across the back with a live eel which he was showing to some customers at that moment.
They saw the doppler trying to flee past a sheep pen.
From the other side! Dainty yelled. Cut him off from the other side Geralt!
The doppler shot like an arrow along the fence green waistcoat flashing. It was becoming clear why he was not changing into anybody else. No one could rival a halflings agility. No one. Apart from another halfling. Or a witcher.
Geralt saw the doppler suddenly changing direction kicking up a cloud of dust and nimbly ducking into a hole in the fence surrounding a large tent serving as a slaughterhouse and a shambles. Dainty also saw it. The doppler jumped between the palings and began to force his way between the flock of bleating sheep crowded into the enclosure. It was clear he would not make it. Geralt turned and rushed after him between the palings. He felt a sudden tug heard the crack of leather tearing and the leather suddenly became very loose under his other arm.
The Witcher stopped. Swore. Spat. And swore again.
Dainty rushed into the tent after the doppler. From inside came screaming the noise of blows cursing and an awful banging noise.
The Witcher swore a third time extremely obscenely then gnashed his teeth raised his hand and formed his fingers into the Aard Sign aiming it straight at the tent. The tent billowed up like a sail during a gale and from the inside reverberated a hellish howling clattering and lowing of oxen. The tent collapsed.
The doppler crawling on its belly darted out from beneath the canvas and dashed towards another smaller tent probably the cold store. Right away Geralt pointed his hand towards him and jabbed him in the back with the Sign. The doppler tumbled to the ground as though struck by lightning turned a somersault but immediately sprang up and rushed into the tent. The Witcher was hot on his heels.
It stank of meat inside the tent. And it was dark.
Tellico Lunngrevink Letorte was standing there breathing heavily clinging with both hands onto a side of pork hanging on a pole. There was no other way out of the tent the canvas firmly fastened to the ground with numerous pegs.
Its a pleasure to meet you again mimic Geralt said coldly.
The doppler was breathing heavily and hoarsely.
Leave me alone it finally grunted. Why are you tormenting me Witcher?
Tellico Geralt said Youre asking foolish questions. In order to come into possession of Biberveldts horses and identity you cut his head open and abandoned him in the wilds. Youre still making use of his personality and ignoring the problems you are causing him. The Devil only knows what else youre planning but I shall confuse those plans in any event. I dont want to kill you or turn you over to the authorities but you must leave the city. Ill see to it that you do.
And if I dont want to?
Ill carry you out in a sack on a handcart.
The doppler swelled up abruptly and then suddenly became thinner and began to grow his curly chestnut hair turning white and straightening reaching his shoulders. The halflings green waistcoat shone like oil becoming black leather and silver studs sparkled on the shoulders and sleeves. The chubby ruddy face elongated and paled.
The hilt of a sword extended above its right shoulder.
Dont come any closer the second Witcher said huskily and smiled. Dont come any nearer Geralt. I wont let you lay hands on me.
What a hideous smile I have Geralt thought reaching for his sword. What a hideous face I have. And how hideously I squint. So is that what I look like? Damn.
The hands of the doppler and the Witcher simultaneously touched their sword hilts and both swords simultaneously sprang from their scabbards. Both witchers simultaneously took two quick soft steps; one to the front the other to the side. Both of them simultaneously raised their swords and swung them in a short hissing moulinet.
Simultaneously they both stopped dead frozen in position.
You cannot defeat me the doppler snarled. Because I am you Geralt.
You are mistaken Tellico the Witcher said softly. Drop your sword and resume Biberveldts form. Otherwise youll regret it I warn you.
I am you the doppler repeated. You will not gain an advantage over me. You cannot defeat me because I am you!
You cannot have any idea what it means to be me mimic.
Tellico lowered the hand gripping the sword.
I am you he repeated.
No the Witcher countered you are not. And do you know why? Because youre a poor little good-natured doppler. A doppler who after all could have killed Biberveldt and buried his body in the undergrowth by so doing gaining total safety and utter certainty that he would not be unmasked ever by anybody including the halflings spouse the famous Gardenia Biberveldt. But you didnt kill him Tellico because you didnt have the courage. Because youre a poor little good-natured doppler whose close friends call him Dudu. And whoever you might change into youll always be the same. You only know how to copy what is good in us because you dont understand the bad in us. Thats what you are doppler.
Tellico moved backwards pressing his back against the tents canvas.
Which is why Geralt continued you will now turn back into Biberveldt and hold your hands out nicely to be tied up. You arent capable of defying me because I am what you are unable of copying. You are absolutely aware of this Dudu. Because you took over my thoughts for a moment.
Tellico straightened up abruptly. His faces features still those of the Witcher blurred and spread out and his white hair curled and began to darken.
Youre right Geralt he said indistinctly because his lips had begun to change shape. I took over your thoughts. Only briefly but it was sufficient. Do you know what Im going to do now?
The leather witcher jacket took on a glossy cornflower blue colour. The doppler smiled straightened his plum bonnet with its egrets feather and tightened the strap of the lute slung over his shoulder. The lute which had been a sword a moment ago.
Ill tell you what Im going to do Witcher he said with the rippling laughter characteristic of Dandelion. Ill go on my way squeeze my way into the crowd and change quietly into any-old-body even a beggar. Because I prefer being a beggar in Novigrad to being a doppler in the wilds. Novigrad owes me something Geralt. The building of a city here tainted a land we could have lived in; lived in in our natural form. We have been exterminated hunted down like rabid dogs. Im one of the few to survive. I want to survive and I will survive. Long ago when wolves pursued me in the winter I turned into a wolf and ran with the pack for several weeks. And survived. Now Ill do that again because I dont want to roam about through wildernesses and be forced to winter beneath fallen trees. I dont want to be forever hungry I dont want to serve as target practice all the time. Here in Novigrad its warm theres grub I can make money and very seldom do people shoot arrows at each other. Novigrad is a pack of wolves. Ill join that pack and survive. Understand?
Geralt nodded reluctantly.
You gave dwarves halflings gnomes and even elves the doppler continued twisting his mouth in an insolent Dandelion smile the modest possibility of assimilation. Why should I be any worse off? Why am I denied that right? What do I have to do to be able to live in this city? Turn into a she-elf with doe eyes silky hair and long legs? Well? In what way is a she-elf better than me? Only that at the sight of the she-elf you pick up speed and at the sight of me you want to puke? You know where you can stuff an argument like that. Ill survive anyway. I know how to. As a wolf I ran I howled and I fought without others over a she-wolf. As a resident of Novigrad Ill trade weave wicker baskets beg or steal; as one of you Ill do what one of you usually does. Who knows perhaps Ill even take a wife.
The Witcher said nothing.
Yes as I said Tellico continued calmly. Im going. And you Geralt will not even try to stop me. Because I Geralt knew your thoughts for a moment. Including the ones you dont want to admit to the ones you even hide from yourself. Because to stop me youd have to kill me. And the thought of killing me in cold blood fills you with disgust. Doesnt it?
The Witcher said nothing.
Tellico adjusted the strap of the lute again turned away and walked towards the exit. He walked confidently but Geralt saw him hunch his neck and shoulders in expectation of the whistle of a sword blade. He put his sword in its scabbard. The doppler stopped in mid-step and looked around.
Farewell Geralt he said. Thank you.
Farewell Dudu the Witcher replied. Good luck.
The doppler turned away and headed towards the crowded bazaar with Dandelions sprightly cheerful swinging gait. Like Dandelion he swung his left arm vigorously and just like Dandelion he grinned at the wenches as he passed them. Geralt set off slowly after him. Slowly.
Tellico seized his lute in full stride; after slowing his pace he played two chords and then dextrously played a tune Geralt knew. Turning away slightly he sang.
Exactly like Dandelion.
Spring will return on the road the rain will fall
Hearts will be warmed by the heat of the sun
It must be thus for fire still smoulders in us all
An eternal fire hope for each one.
Pass that on to Dandelion if you remember he called and tell him that Winter is a lousy title. The ballad should be called The Eternal Fire. Farewell Witcher!
Hey! suddenly resounded. You pheasant!
Tellico turned around in astonishment. From behind a stall emerged Vespula her breast heaving violently raking him up with a foreboding gaze.
Eyeing up tarts you cad? she hissed breast heaving more and more enticingly. Singing your little songs are you you knave?
Tellico took off his bonnet and bowed broadly smiling Dandelions characteristic smile.
Vespula my dear he said ingratiatingly how glad I am to see you. Forgive me my sweet. I owe you—
Oh you do you do Vespula interrupted loudly. And what you owe me you will now pay me! Take that!
An enormous copper frying pan flashed in the sun and with a deep loud clang smacked into the dopplers head. Tellico staggered and fell with an indescribably stupid expression frozen on his face arms spread out and his physiognomy suddenly began to change melt and lose its similarity to anything at all. Seeing it the Witcher leaped towards him in full flight snatching a large kilim from a stall. Having unfurled the kilim on the ground he sent the doppler onto it with two kicks and rolled it up in it quickly but tightly.
Sitting down on the bundle he wiped his forehead with a sleeve. Vespula gripping the frying pan looked at him malevolently and the crowd closed in all around.
Hes sick the Witcher said and smiled affectedly. Its for his own good. Dont crowd good people the poor thing needs air.
Did you hear? Chappelle asked calmly but resonantly suddenly pushing his way through the throng. Please do not form a public gathering here! Please disperse! Public gatherings are forbidden. Punishable by a fine!
In the blink of an eye the crowd scattered to the sides only to reveal Dandelion approaching swiftly to the sounds of his lute. On seeing him Vespula let out an ear-splitting scream dropped the frying pan and fled across the square.
What happened? Dandelion asked. Did she see the Devil?
Geralt stood up holding the bundle which had begun to move weakly. Chappelle slowly approached. He was alone and his personal guard was nowhere to be seen.
I wouldnt come any closer Geralt said quietly. If I were you Lord Chappelle sir I wouldnt come any closer.
You wouldnt? Chappelle tightened his thin lips looking at him coldly.
If I were you Lord Chappelle I would pretend I never saw anything.
Yes no doubt Chappelle said. But you are not me.
Dainty Biberveldt ran up from behind the tent out of breath and sweaty. On seeing Chappelle he stopped began to whistle held his hands behind his back and pretended to be admiring the roof of the granary.
Chappelle went over and stood by Geralt very close. The Witcher did not move but only narrowed his eyes. For a moment they looked at each other and then Chappelle leaned over the bundle.
Dudu he said to Dandelions strangely deformed cordovan boots sticking out of the rolled-up kilim. Copy Biberveldt and quickly.
What? Dainty yelled stopping staring at the granary. Whats that?
Be quiet Chappelle said. Well Dudu are things coming along?
Im just a muffled grunting issued from the kilim. Im… Just a moment…
The cordovan boots sticking out of the kilim stretched became blurred and changed into the halflings bare hairy feet.
Get out Dudu Chappelle said. And you Dainty be quiet. All halflings look the same dont they?
Dainty mumbled something indistinctly. Geralt eyes still narrowed looked at Chappelle suspiciously. The minister however straightened up and looked all around and all that remained of any gawkers who were still in the vicinity was the clacking of wooden clogs dying away in the distance.
The second Dainty Biberveldt scrambled and rolled out of the bundle sneezed sat up and rubbed his eyes and nose. Dandelion perched himself on a trunk lying alongside and strummed away on his lute with an expression of moderate interest on his face.
Who do you think that is Dainty? Chappelle asked mildly. Very similar to you dont you think?
Hes my cousin the halfling shot back and grinned. A close relative. Dudu Biberveldt of Knotgrass Meadow an astute businessman. Ive actually just decided…
Yes Dainty?
Ive decided to appoint him my factor in Novigrad. What do you say to that cousin?
Oh thank you cousin his close relative the pride of the Biberveldt clan and an astute businessman smiled broadly. Chappelle also smiled.
Has your dream about life in the city come true? Geralt muttered. What do you see in this city Dudu… and you Chappelle?
Had you lived on the moors Chappelle muttered back and eaten roots got soaked and frozen youd know. We also deserve something from life Geralt. We arent inferior to you.
Very true Geralt nodded. You arent. Perhaps it even happens that youre better. What happened to the real Chappelle?
Popped his clogs the second Chappelle whispered. Two months ago now. Apoplexy. May the earth lie lightly on him and may the Eternal Fire light his way. I happened to be in the vicinity… No one noticed… Geralt? You arent going to—
What didnt anyone notice? the Witcher asked with an inscrutable expression.
Thank you Chappelle muttered.
Are there more of you?
Is it important?
No agreed the Witcher it isnt.
A two-cubit-tall figure in a green cap and spotted coney fur coat dashed out from behind the wagons and stalls and trotted over.
Mr Biberveldt the gnome panted and stammered looking around and sweeping his eyes from one halfling to the other.
I presume shorty Dainty said that you have a matter for my cousin Dudu Biberveldt to deal with. Speak. Speak. That is him.
Sorrel reports that everything has gone the gnome said and smiled broadly showing small pointed teeth for four crowns apiece.
I think I know what its about Dainty said. Pity Vivaldis not here he would have calculated the profit in no time.
If I may cousin Tellico Lunngrevink Letorte Penstock for short Dudu to his close friends and for the whole of Novigrad a member of the large Biberveldt family spoke up. If I may Ill calculate it. I have an infallible memory for figures. As well as for other things.
By all means Dainty gave a bow. By all means cousin.
The costs the doppler frowned were low. Eighteen for the oil eight-fifty for the cod liver oil hmm… Altogether including the string forty-five crowns. Takings: six hundred at four crowns makes two thousand four hundred. No commission because there werent any middlemen…
Please do not forget about the tax the second Chappelle reminded him. Please do not forget that standing before you is a representative of the city authorities and the temple who treats his duties gravely and conscientiously.
Its exempt from tax Dudu Biberveldt declared. Because it was sold in a sacred cause.
Hey?
The cod liver oil wax and oil dyed with a little cochineal the doppler explained need only be poured into earthenware bowls with a piece of string dipped into it. The string when lit gives a beautiful red flame which burns for a long time and doesnt smell. The Eternal Fire. The priests needed vigil lights for the altars of the Eternal Fire. Now they dont need them.
Bloody hell… Chappelle muttered. Youre right. They needed vigil lights… Dudu youre brilliant.
I take after my mother Tellico said modestly.
Yes indeed the spitting image of his mother Dainty agreed. Just look into those intelligent eyes. Begonia Biberveldt my darling aunt as I live and breathe.
Geralt Dandelion groaned. Hes earned more in three days than Ive earned in my whole life by singing!
In your place the Witcher said gravely Id quit singing and take up commerce. Ask him he may take you on as an apprentice.
Witcher Tellico said tugging him by the sleeve. Tell me how I could… repay you…?
Twenty-two crowns.
What?
For a new jacket. Look whats left of mine.
Do you know what? Dandelion suddenly yelled. Lets all go to the house of ill repute! To Passiflora! The Biberveldts are paying!
Do they admit halflings? Dainty asked with concern.
Just let them try not to Chappelle put on a menacing expression. Just let them try and Ill accuse their entire bordello of heresy.
Right Dandelion called. Very satisfactory. Geralt? Are you coming?
The Witcher laughed softly.
Do you know what Dandelion? he said. Ill come with pleasure.
A LITTLE SACRIFICE
The mermaid emerged to waist-height from the water and splashed her hands violently and hard against the surface. Geralt saw that she had gorgeous utterly perfect breasts. Only the colour spoiled the effect; the nipples were dark green and the areolae around them were only a little lighter. Nimbly aligning herself with an approaching wave the mermaid arched gracefully shook her wet willow-green hair and sang melodiously.
What? The duke leaned over the side of the cog. What is she saying?
Shes declining Geralt said. She says she doesnt want to.
Have you explained that I love her? That I cant imagine life without her? That I want to wed her? Only her no other?
Yes I have.
And?
And nothing.
Say it again.
The Witcher touched his lips and produced a quavering warble. Struggling to find the words and the intonation he began to translate the dukes avowal.
The mermaid lying back on the water interrupted.
Dont translate dont tire yourself she sang. I understand. When he says he loves me he always puts on such a foolish expression. Did he say anything definite?
Not really.
Pity the mermaid said before she flapped in the water and dived under flexing her tail powerfully and making the sea foam with her notched flukes which resembled the tail of a mullet.
What? What did she say? the duke asked.
That its a shame.
Whats a shame? What does she mean shame?
Id say she turned you down.
Nobody refuses me! the duke roared denying the obvious facts.
My Lord the skipper of the cog muttered walking over to them. The nets are ready all we need do is cast them and she will be yours…
I wouldnt advise it Geralt said softly. Shes not alone. There are more of them beneath the waves and there may be a kraken deeper down there.
The skipper quaked blanched and seized his backside with both hands in a nonsensical gesture.
A kra—kraken?
Yes a kraken the Witcher repeated. I dont advise fooling around with nets. All she need do is scream and all thatll be left of this tub will be a few floating planks. Theyd drown us like kittens. Besides Agloval you should decide whether you want to wed her or catch her in a net and keep her in a barrel.
I love her Agloval said firmly. I want her for my wife. But for that she must have legs and not a scaly tail. And its feasible since I bought a magical elixir with a full guarantee for two pounds of exquisite pearls. After drinking it shell grow legs. Shell just suffer a little for three days no more. Call her Witcher tell her again.
Ive already told her twice. She said absolutely no she doesnt consent. But she added that she knows a witch a sea witch who is prepared to cast a spell to turn your legs into a handsome tail. Painlessly.
She must be insane! She thinks I would have a fishy tail? Not a chance! Call her Geralt!
The Witcher leaned far out over the side. The water in the boats shadow was green and seemed as thick as jelly. He did not have to call. The mermaid suddenly shot out above the surface in a fountain of water. For a moment she literally stood on her tail then dived down into the waves and turned on her back revealing her attributes in all their glory. Geralt swallowed.
Hey! she sang. Will this take much longer? My skins getting chapped from the sun! White Hair ask him if he consents.
He does not the Witcher sang back. Sheenaz understand he cannot have a tail cannot live beneath the water. You can breathe air but he cannot breathe underwater!
I knew it! the mermaid screamed shrilly. I knew it! Excuses foolish naive excuses not a bit of sacrifice! Whoever loves makes sacrifices! I made sacrifices for him every day I hauled myself out onto the rocks for him I wore out the scales on my bottom frayed my fins; I caught colds for him! And he will not sacrifice those two hideous pegs for me? Love doesnt just mean taking one also has to be able to give up things to make sacrifices! Tell him that!
Sheenaz! Geralt called. Dont you understand? He cannot survive in the water!
I dont accept stupid excuses! I… I like him too and want to have his fry but how can I if he doesnt want to be a spawner? Where should I deposit my eggs hey? In his cap?
What is she saying? the duke yelled. Geralt! I didnt bring you here to chat with her—
Shes digging her heels in. Shes angry.
Cast those nets! Agloval roared. Ill keep her in a pool for a month and then shell—
Shove it! the skipper yelled back demonstrating what he was to shove with his middle finger. There might be a kraken beneath us! Ever seen a kraken My Lord? Hop into the water if that is your will and catch her with your hands! Im not getting involved. I make my living by fishing from this cog!
You make your living by my goodwill you scoundrel! Cast your net or Ill order you strung up!
Kiss a dogs arse! Im in charge on this cog!
Be quiet both of you! Geralt shouted irately. Shes saying something its a difficult dialect I need to concentrate!
Ive had enough! Sheenaz yelled melodiously. Im hungry! Well White Hair he must decide decide at once. Tell him just one thing: I will not be made a laughing stock of any longer or associate with him if hes going to look like a four-armed starfish. Tell him I have girlfriends who are much better at those frolics he was suggesting on the rocks! But I consider them immature games fit for children before they shed their scales. Im a normal healthy mermaid—
Sheenaz—
Dont interrupt! I havent finished yet! Im healthy normal and ripe for spawning and if he really desires me he must have a tail fins and everything a normal merman has. Otherwise I dont want to know him!
Geralt translated quickly trying not to be vulgar. He was not very successful. The duke flushed and swore foully.
The brazen hussy! he yelled. The frigid mackerel! Let her find herself a cod!
What did he say? Sheenaz asked curiously swimming over.
That he doesnt want a tail!
Then tell him… Tell him to dry up!
What did she say?
She told you the Witcher translated to go drown yourself.
Ah well Dandelion said. Pity I couldnt sail with you but what could I do? Sailing makes me puke like nobodys business. But you know what Ive never spoken to a mermaid. Its a shame dammit.
I know you Geralt said fastening his saddle bags. Youll write a ballad anyway.
Never fear. I already have the first stanzas. In my ballad the mermaid will sacrifice herself for the duke shell exchange her fishtail for slender legs but will pay for it by losing her voice. The duke will betray her abandon her and then shell perish from grief and turn into foam when the first rays of sunshine…
Whod believe such rot?
It doesnt matter Dandelion snorted. Ballads arent written to be believed. They are written to move their audience. But why am I talking to you about this when you know bugger all about it? Youd better tell me how much Agloval paid you.
He didnt pay me anything. He claimed I had failed to carry out the task. That he had expected something else and he pays for results not good intentions.
Dandelion shook his head took off his bonnet and looked at the Witcher with a forlorn grimace on his mouth.
You mean we still dont have any money?
So it would seem.
Dandelion made an even more forlorn face.
Its all my fault he moaned. Im to blame for it all. Geralt are you angry at me?
No the Witcher wasnt angry at Dandelion. Not at all.
There was no doubt Dandelion was to blame for what had befallen them. He had insisted they went to the fair at Four Maples. Organising festivities the poet argued satisfied peoples profound and natural needs. From time to time the bard maintained a chap has to meet other people in a place where he can have a laugh and a singsong gorge himself on kebabs and pierogis drink beer listen to music and squeeze a girl as he swung her around in the dance. If every chap wanted to satisfy those needs Dandelion argued individually periodically and randomly an indescribable mess would arise. For that reason holidays and festivities were invented. And since holidays and festivities exist a chap ought to frequent them.
Geralt did not challenge this although taking part in festivities occupied a very low position on the list of his own profound and natural needs. Nonetheless he agreed to accompany Dandelion for he was counting on obtaining information from the gathered concentration of people about a possible mission or job; hed had no work for a long time and his cash reserves had shrunk alarmingly.
The Witcher did not bear Dandelion a grudge for provoking the Rangers of the Forest. He was not innocent either; for he could have intervened and held the bard back. He did not however for he could not stand the infamous Guardians of the Forest known as the Rangers a volunteer force whose mission was to eradicate non-humans. It had annoyed him to hear their boasts about elves spriggans and eerie wives bristling with arrows butchered or hanged. Dandelion though who after travelling for some time with the Witcher had become convinced of his impunity from retaliation had surpassed himself. Initially the Rangers had not reacted to his mockery taunts or filthy suggestions which aroused the thunderous laughter of the watching villagers. When however Dandelion sang a hastily-composed obscene and abusive couplet ending with the words: If you want to be a nothing be a Ranger an argument and then a fierce mass punch-up broke out. The shed serving as the dancehall went up in smoke. Intervention came in the form of a squad of men belonging to Castellan Budibog also known as the Emptyheaded on whose estates lay Four Maples. The Rangers Dandelion and Geralt were found jointly guilty of all the damage and offences which included the seduction of a red-headed and mute girl who was found in the bushes behind the barn following the incident blushing and grinning foolishly with her shift torn up to her armpits. Fortunately Castellan Budibog knew Dandelion so it ended with a fine being paid which nonetheless ate up all the money they had. They also had to flee from Four Maples as fast as they could ride because the Rangers who had been chased out of the village were threatening revenge and an entire squad of them numbering over forty men was hunting rusalkas in the neighbouring forests. Geralt did not have the slightest desire to be hit by one of the Rangers arrows whose heads were barbed like harpoons and inflicted dreadful injuries.
So they had to abandon their original plan which had involved doing the rounds of the villages on the edge of the forest where the Witcher had reasonable prospects of work. Instead they rode to Bremervoord on the coast. Unfortunately apart from the love affair between Duke Agloval and the mermaid Sheenaz which offered small chances of success the Witcher had failed to find a job. They had already sold Geralts gold signet for food and an alexandrite brooch the troubadour had once been given as a souvenir by one of his numerous paramours. Things were tight. But no the Witcher was not angry with Dandelion.
No Dandelion he said. Im not angry with you.
Dandelion did not believe him which was quite apparent by the fact that he kept quiet. Dandelion was seldom quiet. He patted his horses neck and fished around in his saddlebags for the umpteenth time. Geralt knew he would not find anything there they could sell. The smell of food borne on a breeze from a nearby tavern was becoming unbearable.
Master? somebody shouted. Hey master!
Yes? Geralt said turning around. A big-bellied well-built man in felt boots and a heavy fur-lined wolf-skin coat clambered out of a cart pulled by a pair of onagers which had just stopped alongside.
Erm… that is the paunchy man said embarrassed walking over I didnt mean you sir I meant… I meant Master Dandelion…
It is I. The poet proudly sat up straight adjusting his bonnet bearing an egret feather. What is your need my good man?
Begging your pardon the paunchy man said. I am Teleri Drouhard spice merchant and dean of our local Guild. My son Gaspard has just plighted his troth to Dalia the daughter of Mestvin the cog skipper.
Ha Dandelion said maintaining a haughty air. I offer my congratulations and extend my wishes of happiness to the betrothed couple. How may I be of help? Does it concern jus primae noctis? I never decline that.
Hey? No… that is… You see the betrothal banquet and ball are this evening. Since it got out that you master have come to Bremervoord my wife wont let up–just like a woman. Listen she says Teleri well show everybody we arent churls like them that we stand for culture and art. That when we have a feast its refined and not an excuse to get pissed and throw up. I says to her silly moo but weve already hired one bard wont that suffice? And she says one is too few ho-ho Master Dandelion well I never such a celebrity thatll be one in the eye for our neighbours. Master? Do us the honour… Im prepared to give five-and-twenty talars as a gesture naturally–to show my support for the arts—
Do my ears deceive me? Dandelion drawled. I I am to be the second bard? An appendix to some other musician? I? I have not sunk so low my dear sir as to accompany somebody!
Drouhard blushed.
Forgive me master he gibbered. That isnt what I meant… It was my wife… Forgive me… Do us the honour…
Dandelion Geralt hissed softly dont put on airs. We need those few pennies.
Dont try to teach me! the poet yelled. Me putting on airs? Me? Look at him! What should I say about you who rejects a lucrative proposition every other day? You wont kill hirikkas because theyre an endangered species or mecopterans because theyre harmless or night spirits because theyre sweet or dragons because your code forbids it. I just imagine it also have my self-respect! I also have a code!
Dandelion please do it for me. A little sacrifice friend nothing more. I swear I wont turn my nose up at the next job that comes along. Come on Dandelion…
The troubadour looked down at the ground and scratched his chin which was covered in soft fair bristles. Drouhard mouth gaping moved closer.
Master… Do us this honour. My wife wont forgive me if I dont invite you. Now then… Ill make it thirty.
Thirty-five Dandelion said firmly.
Geralt smiled and hopefully breathed in the scent of food wafting from the tavern.
Agreed master agreed Teleri Drouhard said quickly so quickly it was evident he would have given forty had the need arisen. And now… My home if you desire to groom yourself and rest is your home. And you sir… What do they call you?
Geralt of Rivia.
And I invite you too sir of course. For a bite to eat and something to drink…
Certainly with pleasure Dandelion said. Show us the way my dear sir. And just between us who is the other bard?
The honourable Miss Essi Daven.
Geralt rubbed a sleeve over the silver studs of his jacket and his belt buckle one more time smoothed down his hair which was held down with a clean headband and polished his boots by rubbing one leg against the other.
Dandelion?
Mm? The bard smoothed the egret feather pinned to his bonnet and straightened and pulled down his jerkin. The two of them had spent half the day cleaning their garments and tidying them up. What Geralt?
Behave in such a way as they throw us out after supper and not before.
You must be joking the poet said indignantly. Watch your manners yourself. Shall we go in?
We shall. Do you hear? Somebodys singing. A woman.
Have you only just noticed? Thats Essi Daven known as Little Eye. What have you never met a female troubadour? True I forgot you steer clear of places where art flourishes. Little Eye is a gifted poet and singer though not without her flaws among which impertinence so I hear is not the least. What she is singing now happens to be one of my ballads. She will soon hear a piece of my mind which will make that little eye of hers water.
Dandelion have mercy. Theyll throw us out.
Dont interfere. These are professional issues. Lets go in.
Dandelion?
Hey?
Why Little Eye?
Youll see.
The banquet was being held in a huge storeroom emptied of barrels of herrings and cod liver oil. The smell had been killed–though not entirely–by hanging up bunches of mistletoe and heather decorated with coloured ribbons wherever possible. Here and there as is customary were also hung plaits of garlic meant to frighten off vampires.
The tables and benches which had been pushed towards the walls had been covered with white linen and in a corner there was a large makeshift hearth and spit. It was crowded but not noisy. More than four dozen people of various estates and professions not to mention the pimply youth and his snub-nosed fiancée with her eyes fixed on her husband-to-be were listening reverentially to a sonorous and melodious ballad sung by a young woman in a demure blue frock sitting on a platform with a lute resting on her knee. The woman could not have been older than eighteen and was very slim. Her long luxuriant hair was the colour of dark gold. They entered as the girl finished the song and thanked the audience for the thunderous applause with a nod of her head which shook her hair gently.
Greetings master greetings Drouhard dressed in his best clothes leapt briskly over to them and pulled them towards the centre of the storeroom. Greetings to you too Gerard sir… I am honoured… Yes… Come here… Noble ladies noble gentlemen! Here is our honoured guest who gave us this honour and honoured us… Master Dandelion the celebrated singer and poetast… poet I mean has honoured us with this great honour… Thus honoured we…
Cheers and applause resounded and just in time for it was looking as though Drouhard would honour and stammer himself to death. Dandelion blushing with pride assumed a superior air and bowed carelessly then waved a hand at a row of girls sitting on a long bench like hens on a roost being chaperoned by older matrons. The girls were sitting stiffly giving the impression they had been stuck to the bench with carpenters glue or some other powerful adhesive. Without exception they were holding their hands on tightly-clenched knees and their mouths were half-open.
And presently Drouhard called. Come forth help yourself to beer fellows and to the vittles! Prithee prithee! Avail yourselves…
The girl in the blue dress forced her way through the crowd which had crashed onto the food-laden tables like a sea wave.
Greetings Dandelion she said.
Geralt considered the expression eyes like stars banal and hackneyed particularly since he had begun travelling with Dandelion as the troubadour was inclined to throw that compliment about freely usually indeed undeservedly. However with regard to Essi Daven even somebody as little susceptible to poetry as the Witcher had to concede the aptness of her nickname. For in her agreeable and pretty but otherwise unremarkable little face shone a huge beautiful shining dark blue eye which riveted the gaze. Essi Davens other eye was largely covered and obscured by a golden curl which fell onto her cheek. From time to time Essi flung the curl away with a toss of her head or a puff at which point it turned out that Little Eyes other little eye was in every way the equal of the first.
Greetings Little Eye Dandelion said grimacing. That was a pretty ballad you just sang. Youve improved your repertoire considerably. Ive always maintained that if one is incapable of writing poetry oneself one should borrow other peoples. Have you borrowed many of them?
A few Essi Daven retorted at once and smiled revealing little white teeth. Two or three. I wanted to use more but it wasnt possible. Dreadful gibberish and the tunes though pleasant and unpretentious in their simplicity–not to say primitivism–are not what my audiences expect. Have you written anything new Dandelion? I dont seem to be aware of it.
Small wonder the bard sighed. I sing my ballads in places to which only the gifted and renowned are invited and you dont frequent such locations after all.
Essi blushed slightly and blew the lock of hair aside.
Very true she said. I dont frequent bordellos as the atmosphere depresses me. I sympathise with you that you have to sing in places like that. But well thats the way it is. If one has no talent one cant choose ones audiences.
Now Dandelion visibly blushed. Little Eye however laughed joyously flung an arm around his neck all of a sudden and kissed him on the cheek. The Witcher was taken aback but not too greatly. A professional colleague of Dandelions could not indeed differ much from him in terms of predictability.
Dandelion you old bugger Essi said still hugging the bards neck. Im glad to see you again in good health and in full possession of your mental faculties.
Pshaw Poppet. Dandelion seized the girl around the waist picked her up and spun her around so that her dress billowed around her. You were magnificent by the Gods I havent heard such marvellous spitefulness for ages. You bicker even more captivatingly than you sing! And you look simply stunning!
Ive asked you so many times Essi said blowing her lock of hair away and glancing at Geralt not to call me Poppet Dandelion. Besides I think its high time you introduced me to your companion. I see he doesnt belong to our guild.
Save us O Gods the troubadour laughed. He Poppet has no voice or ear and can only rhyme rear with beer. This is Geralt of Rivia a member of the guild of witchers. Come closer Geralt and kiss Little Eyes hand.
The Witcher approached not really knowing what to do. One usually only kissed ladies of the rank of duchess and higher on the hand or the ring and one was supposed to kneel. Regarding women of lower standing that gesture here in the South was considered erotically unambiguous and as such tended to be reserved only for close couples.
Little Eye dispelled his doubts however by willingly holding her hand out high with the fingers facing downwards. He grasped it clumsily and feigned a kiss. Essi her beautiful eye still popping out of her head blushed.
Geralt of Rivia she said. What company you keep Dandelion.
It is an honour for me the Witcher muttered aware he was rivalling Drouhard in eloquence. Madam—
Damn it Dandelion snorted. Dont abash Little Eye with all that stammering and titling. Shes Essi hes Geralt. End of introductions. Lets get to the point Poppet.
If you call me Poppet once more youll get a slap. What point do we have to get to?
We have to agree on how were going to sing. I suggest one after the other a few ballads each. For the effect. Of course singing our own ballads.
Suits me.
How much is Drouhard paying you?
None of your business. Who goes first?
You.
Agreed. Hey look whos joined us. The Most Noble Duke of Agloval. Hes just coming in look.
Well well Dandelion said gleefully. The audience is going up-market. Although on the other hand we oughtnt to count on him. Hes a skinflint. Geralt can confirm it. The local duke bloody hates paying. He hires admittedly. But hes not so good at paying.
Ive heard a few things about him. Essi looking at Geralt tossed the lock of hair back from her cheek. They were talking about it in the harbour and by the jetty. The famous Sheenaz right?
Agloval responded to the deep bows of the two rows by the door with a brief nod and then almost immediately went over to Drouhard and drew him away into a corner giving a sign that he was not expecting deference or ceremony in the centre of the storehouse. Geralt watched them out of the corner of his eye. They spoke softly but it was apparent that they were both agitated. Drouhard kept wiping his forehead with a sleeve shaking his head and scratching his neck. He was asking questions which the duke surly and dour was responding to by shrugging.
His Grace Essi said quietly moving closer to Geralt looks preoccupied. Affairs of the heart again? The misunderstanding from earlier today with his famous mermaid? Hey Witcher?
Perhaps Geralt answered looking askance at the poet astonished and strangely annoyed by her question. Well everybody has some personal problems. However not everybody likes them to be sung about from the rooftops.
Little Eye blanched slightly blew away her lock of hair and looked at him defiantly.
By saying that did you mean to offend or only tease me?
Neither one nor the other. I merely wanted to forestall further questions about the problems between Agloval and the mermaid. Questions I do not feel entitled to answer.
I understand. Essi Davens gorgeous eye narrowed slightly. I wont burden you with a similar dilemma. I shall not ask you any of the questions I meant to ask and which if Im to be frank I treated only as a prelude and invitation to a pleasant conversation. Very well that conversation will not come to pass then and you need fear not that the content will be sung from some rooftop. It has been my pleasure.
She turned on her heel and walked off towards the tables where she was immediately greeted with respect. Dandelion shifted his weight from foot to foot and coughed tellingly.
I wont say that was exquisitely courteous of you Geralt.
It came out wrongly the Witcher agreed. I hurt her quite unintentionally. Perhaps I should follow her and apologise?
Drop it the bard said and added aphoristically There is never a second opportunity to make a first impression. Come on lets have a beer instead.
They did not make it to the beer. Drouhard pushed his way through a garrulous group of merchants.
Gerard sir he said. Please step this way. His Grace would like to talk to you.
Very well.
Geralt Dandelion seized him by the sleeve. Dont forget.
Forget what?
You promised to agree to any task without complaint. I shall hold you to it. What was it you said? A little sacrifice?
Very well Dandelion.
He went off with Drouhard into the corner of the storeroom away from the guests. Agloval was sitting at a low table. He was accompanied by a colourfully dressed weather-beaten man with a short black beard whom Geralt had not noticed earlier.
We meet again Witcher the duke said. Although this morning I swore I didnt want to see you again. But I do not have another witcher to hand so you will have to do. Meet Zelest my bailiff and pearl diving steward. Speak Zelest.
This morning said the weather-beaten individual in a low voice we planned to go diving outside the usual grounds. One boat went further westwards beyond the headland towards the Dragons Fangs.
The Dragons Fangs Agloval cut in are two volcanic reefs at the end of the headland. They can be seen from our coast.
Aye Zelest confirmed. People dont usually sail there for there are whirlpools and rocks its dangerous to dive there. But theres fewer and fewer pearls by the coast. Aye one boat went there. A crew of seven souls two sailors and five divers including one woman. When they hadnt returned by the eventide we began to fret although the sea was calm as if oil had been poured on it. I sent a few swift skiffs there and we soon found the boat drifting on the sea. There was no one in it not a living soul. Vanished into thin air. We know not what happened. But there must have been fighting there a veritable massacre. There were signs…
What signs? the Witcher squinted.
Well the whole deck was spattered in blood.
Drouhard hissed and looked around anxiously. Zelest lowered his voice.
It was as I said he repeated clenching his jaw. The boat was spattered in gore length and breadth. No question but a veritable massacre took place on board. Something killed those people. They say it was a sea monster. No doubt a sea monster.
Not pirates? asked Geralt softly. Or pearl diving competition? Do you rule out a normal knife fight?
We do said the duke. There are no pirates here no competition. And knife fights dont result in everybody–to the last man–disappearing. No Geralt. Zelest is right. It was a sea monster and nothing else. Listen now no one dares go to sea not even to the nearby and familiar fishing grounds. The people are scared stiff and the harbour is paralysed. Even the cogs and galleys arent setting out. Do you see Witcher?
I see Geralt nodded. Who will show me this place?
Ha Agloval placed a hand on the table and drummed his fingers. I like that. Thats witcher talk. Getting to the point at once without unnecessary chatter. Yes I like that. Do you see Drouhard? I told you a hungry witcher is a good witcher. Well Geralt? After all were it not for your musical companion you would have gone to bed without your supper again. My information is correct is it not?
Drouhard lowered his head. Zelest stared vacantly ahead.
Wholl show me the place? Geralt repeated looking coldly at Agloval.
Zelest said the duke his smile fading. Zelest will show you the Dragons Fangs and the route to them. When will you start work?
First thing tomorrow morning. Be at the harbour Mr Zelest.
Very well Master Witcher.
Excellent. The duke rubbed his hands and smiled mockingly again. Geralt Im relying on you to do better with this monster than you did with the Sheenaz situation. I really am. Aha one more thing. I forbid any gossiping about this incident; I dont want any more panic than we already have on our hands. Do you understand Drouhard? Ill order your tongue torn out if you breathe a word.
I understand Your Grace.
Good Agloval said getting up. Then I shall go I shall not interfere with the ball nor provoke any rumours. Farewell Drouhard. Wish the betrothed couple happiness on my behalf.
My thanks Duke.
Essi Daven who was sitting on a low stool surrounded by a dense crowd of listeners was singing a melodious and wistful ballad about the woeful fate of a betrayed lover. Dandelion leaning against a post was muttering something under his breath and counting bars and syllables on his fingers.
Well? he asked. Do you have a job Geralt?
Yes the Witcher answered not going into details which in any case did not concern the bard.
I told you I smelt a rat–and money. Good very good. Ill make some money you will too well be able to afford to revel. Well go to Cidaris in time for the grape harvest festival. And now if youll excuse me Ive spotted something interesting on the bench over there.
Geralt followed the poets gaze but aside from about a dozen girls with half-open mouths he saw nothing interesting. Dandelion pulled down his jerkin set his bonnet over his right ear and approached the bench in long swinging strides. Having passed the matrons guarding the maidens with a deft flanking manoeuvre he began his customary ritual of flashing a broad smile.
Essi Daven finished her ballad and was rewarded with applause a small purse and a large bouquet of pretty–though somewhat withered–chrysanthemums.
The Witcher circulated among the guests looking for an opportunity to finally occupy a seat at the table which was laden with vittles. He gazed longingly at the rapidly vanishing pickled herrings stuffed cabbage leaves boiled cod heads and mutton chops at the rings of sausage and capons being torn into pieces and the smoked salmon and hams being chopped up with knives. The problem was that there were no vacant seats at the table.
The maidens and matrons somewhat livened up surrounded Dandelion calling squeakily for a performance. Dandelion smiled falsely and made excuses ineffectually feigning modesty.
Geralt overcoming his embarrassment virtually forced his way to the table. An elderly gentleman smelling strongly of vinegar moved aside surprisingly courteously and willingly almost knocking off several guests sitting alongside him. Geralt got down to eating without delay and in a flash had cleared the only dish he could reach. The gentleman smelling of vinegar passed him another. In gratitude the Witcher listened attentively to the elderly gentlemans long tirade concerning the present times and the youth of today. The elderly gentleman stubbornly described sexual freedom as laxity so Geralt had some difficulty keeping a straight face.
Essi stood by the wall beneath bunches of mistletoe alone tuning her lute. The Witcher saw a young man in a brocaded waisted kaftan approaching and saying something to the poet smiling wanly the while. Essi looked at the young man her pretty mouth sneering slightly and said several quick words. The young man cowered and walked hurriedly away and his ears as red as beetroots glowed in the semi-darkness for a long time afterwards.
… abomination shame and disgrace the elderly gentleman smelling of vinegar continued. One enormous laxity sir.
Indeed Geralt nodded tentatively wiping his plate with a hunk of bread.
May I request silence noble ladies noble lords Drouhard called walking into the middle of the room. The celebrated Master Dandelion in spite of being a little bodily indisposed and weary shall now sing for us his celebrated ballad about Queen Marienn and the Black Raven! He shall do it at the urgent plea of Miss Veverka the millers daughter whom he said he may not refuse.
Miss Veverka one of the less comely girls on the bench became beautified in the blink of an eye. Uproar and applause erupted drowning out further laxity from the elderly gentleman smelling of vinegar. Dandelion waited for total silence played a striking prelude on his lute after which he began to sing without taking his eyes off Miss Veverka who was growing more beautiful with each verse. Indeed Geralt thought that whoreson is more effective than all the magical oils and creams Yennefer sells in her little shop in Vengerberg.
He saw Essi steal behind the crowded semicircle of Dandelions audience and cautiously vanish through the door to the terrace. Driven by a strange impulse he slipped nimbly out from behind the table and followed her.
She stood leaning forward resting her elbows on the railing of the jetty head drawn into her delicate upraised shoulders. She was gazing at the rippling sea glistening from the light of the moon and the fires burning in the harbour. A board creaked beneath Geralts foot. Essi straightened up.
Im sorry I didnt mean to disturb you he said stiffly searching for that sudden grimace on her lips to which she had treated the young man in brocade a moment earlier.
You arent disturbing me she replied smiling and tossing back her lock of hair. Im not seeking solitude here but fresh air. Was all that smoke and airlessness bothering you too?
A little. But Im more bothered by knowing that I offended you. I came here to apologise Essi to try to regain the chance of a pleasant conversation.
You deserve my apology she said pressing her hands down on the railing. I reacted too impetuously. I always react too impetuously I dont know how to control myself. Excuse me and give me another chance. For a conversation.
He approached and leaned on the railing beside her. He felt the warmth emanating from her and the faint scent of verbena. He liked the scent of verbena although the scent of verbena was not the scent of lilac and gooseberry.
What do you connect with the sea Geralt? she asked suddenly.
Unease he answered almost without thinking.
Interesting. And you seem so calm and composed.
I didnt say I feel unease. You asked for associations.
Associations are the image of the soul. I know what Im talking about Im a poet.
And what do you associate with the sea Essi? he asked quickly to put an end to discussions about the unease he was feeling.
With constant movement she answered after a pause. With change. And with riddles with mystery with something I cannot grasp which I might be able to describe in a thousand different ways in a thousand poems never actually reaching the core the heart of the matter. Yes thats it.
And so he said feeling the verbena affecting him more and more strongly. What you feel is also unease. And you seem so calm and composed.
She turned towards him tossing back her golden curl and fixing her gorgeous eyes on him.
Im not calm or composed Geralt.
It happened suddenly utterly unexpectedly. The movement he made which was supposed to have been just a touch a gentle touch of her arms turned into a powerful grasp of both hands around her very slender waist into a rapid though not rough pulling of her closer and into a sudden passionate contact of their bodies. Essi stiffened suddenly straightened bent her torso powerfully backwards pressed her hands down on his firmly as though she wanted to pull away and push his hands from her waist but instead of that she seized them tightly tipped her head forward parted her lips and hesitated.
Why… Why this? she whispered. Her eye was wide open her golden curl had fallen onto her cheek.
Calmly and slowly he tipped his head forward brought his face closer and suddenly and quickly pursed his lips into a kiss. Essi however even then did not release his hands grasping her waist and still powerfully arched her back avoiding bodily contact. Remaining like that they turned around slowly as though in a dance. She kissed him eagerly expertly. For a long time.
Then she nimbly and effortlessly freed herself from his embrace turned away once again leaned on the railing and drew her head into her shoulders. Geralt suddenly felt dreadfully indescribably stupid. The feeling stopped him from approaching her from putting an arm around her hunched back.
Why? she asked coolly without turning around. Why did you do that?
She glanced at him out of the corner of her eye and the Witcher suddenly understood he had made a mistake. He suddenly knew that insincerity lies pretence and bravado would lead him straight into a swamp where only a springy matted layer of grass and moss liable to yield tear or break at any moment separated him from the abyss below.
Why? she repeated.
He did not answer.
Are you looking for a woman for the night?
He did not reply. Essi turned slowly and touched his arm.
Lets go back in she said easily but he was not deceived by her manner sensing how tense she was. Dont make that face. It was nothing. And the fact that Im not looking for a man for tonight isnt your fault. Is it?
Essi…
Lets go back Geralt. Dandelion has played three encores. Its my turn. Come on Ill sing…
She glanced at him strangely and blew her lock of hair away from her eye.
Ill sing for you.
Oho the Witcher said feigning surprise. So youre here? I thought you wouldnt be back tonight.
Dandelion locked the door with the hasp hung up his lute and his bonnet with the egrets feather on a peg took off his jerkin brushed it down and laid it on some sacks lying in the corner of the small room. Apart from the sacks a wooden pail and a huge palliasse stuffed with dried bean stalks there was no furniture in the attic room–even the candle stood on the floor in a hardened pool of wax. Drouhard admired Dandelion but clearly not enough to give him the run of a chamber or even a boxroom.
And why asked Dandelion removing his boots did you think I wouldnt be back tonight?
I thought the Witcher lifted himself up on an elbow crunching bean straw youd go and sing serenades beneath the window of Miss Veverka at whom your tongue has been hanging out the whole evening like a pointer at the sight of a bitch.
Ha ha the bard laughed. But youre so oafishly stupid. You didnt understand anything. Veverka? I dont care about Veverka. I simply wanted to stab Miss Akeretta with jealousy as I shall make a pass at her tomorrow. Move over.
Dandelion collapsed on the palliasse and pulled the blanket off Geralt. Geralt feeling a strange anger turned his head towards the tiny window through which had it not been for some industrious spiders he would have seen the starry sky.
Why so huffy? the poet asked. Does it bother you that I make advances to girls? Since when? Perhaps youve become a druid and taken a vow of chastity? Or perhaps…
Dont go on. Im tired. Have you not noticed that for the first time in two weeks we have a palliasse and a roof over our heads? Doesnt it gladden you that the rain wont be dripping on us in the wee small hours?
For me Dandelion fantasised a palliasse without a girl isnt a palliasse. Its incomplete happiness and what is incomplete happiness?
Geralt groaned softly as usual when Dandelion was assailed by nocturnal talkativeness.
Incomplete happiness the bard continued engrossed in his own voice is like… a kiss interrupted… Why are you grinding your teeth if I may ask?
Youre incredibly boring Dandelion. Nothing but palliasses girls bums tits incomplete happiness and kisses interrupted by dogs set on you by your lovers parents. Why you clearly cant behave any differently. Clearly only easy lewdness not to say uncritical promiscuity allows you musicians to compose ballads write poems and sing. That is clearly–write it down–the dark side of your talent.
He had said too much and had not cooled his voiced sufficiently. And Dandelion saw through him effortlessly and unerringly.
Aha he said calmly. Essi Daven also known as Little Eye. The alluring little eye of Little Eye fixed its gaze on the Witcher and caused confusion in the Witcher. The Witcher behaved like a little schoolboy before a queen. And rather than blame himself he is blaming her and searching for her dark side.
Youre talking rubbish Dandelion.
No my dear. Essi made an impression on you you cant hide it. I dont see anything wrong with that actually. But beware and dont make a mistake. She is not what you think. If her talent has its dark sides they certainly arent what you imagine.
I conjecture said the Witcher trying to control his voice that you know her very well.
Quite well. But not in the way you think. Not like that.
Quite original for you youll admit.
Youre stupid the bard said stretching and placing both hands under his neck. Ive known Poppet almost since she was a child. To me shes like… well… like a younger sister. So I repeat dont make any silly mistakes about her. Youd be harming her greatly because you also made an impression on her. Admit it you desire her?
Even if I did unlike you Im not accustomed to talking about it Geralt said sharply. Or writing songs about it. I thank you for your words about her because perhaps you have indeed saved me from a stupid mistake. But let that be an end to it. I regard the subject as exhausted.
Dandelion lay motionless for a moment saying nothing but Geralt knew him too well.
I know the poet said at last. Now I know everything.
You know fuck all Dandelion.
Do you know what your problem is Geralt? You think youre different. You flaunt your otherness what you consider abnormal. You aggressively impose that abnormality on others not understanding that for people who think clear-headedly youre the most normal man under the sun and they all wish that everybody was so normal. What of it that you have quicker reflexes than most and vertical pupils in sunlight? That you can see in the dark like a cat? That you know a few spells? Big deal. I my dear once knew an innkeeper who could fart for ten minutes without stopping playing the tune to the psalm Greet us greet us O Morning Star. Heedless of his–lets face it–unusual talent that innkeeper was the most normal among the normal; he had a wife children and a grandmother afflicted by palsy—
What does that have to do with Essi Daven? Could you explain?
Of course. You wrongfully thought Geralt that Little Eye was interested in you out of morbid downright perverted curiosity that she looks at you as though you were a queer fish a two-headed calf or a salamander in a menagerie. And you immediately became annoyed gave her a rude undeserved reprimand at the first opportunity struck back at a blow she hadnt dealt. I witnessed it after all. I didnt witness the further course of events of course but I noticed your flight from the room and saw her glowing cheeks when you returned. Yes Geralt. Im alerting you to a mistake and you have already made it. You wanted to take revenge on her for–in your opinion–her morbid curiosity. You decided to exploit that curiosity.
Youre talking rubbish.
You tried the bard continued unmoved to learn if it was possible to bed her in the hay if she was curious to find out what its like to make love with a misfit with a witcher. Fortunately Essi turned out to be smarter than you and generously took pity on your stupidity having understood its cause. I conclude this from the fact you did not return from the jetty with a fat lip.
Have you finished?
Yes I have.
Goodnight then.
I know why youre furious and gnashing your teeth.
No doubt. You know everything.
I know who warped you like that who left you unable to understand a normal woman. Oh but that Yennefer of yours was a troublemaker; Im damned if I know what you see in her.
Drop it Dandelion.
Do you really not prefer normal girls like Essi? What do sorceresses have that Essi doesnt? Age perhaps? Little Eye may not be the youngest but shes as old as she looks. And do you know what Yennefer once confessed to me after a few stiff drinks? Ha ha… she told me that the first time she did it with a man it was exactly a year after the invention of the two-furrow plough.
Youre lying. Yennefer loathes you like the plague and would never confide in you.
All right I was lying I confess.
You dont have to. I know you.
You only think you know me. Dont forget: Im complicated by nature.
Dandelion the Witcher sighed now genuinely tired. Youre a cynic a lecher a womaniser and a liar. And theres nothing believe me nothing complicated about that. Goodnight.
Goodnight Geralt.
You rise early Essi.
The poet smiled holding down her hair which was being blown around by the wind. She stepped gingerly onto the jetty avoiding the holes and rotten planks.
I couldnt miss the chance of watching the Witcher at work. Will you think me nosey again Geralt? Why I dont deny it I really am nosey. How goes it?
How goes what?
Oh Geralt she said. You underestimate my curiosity and my talent for gathering and interpreting information. I know everything about the case of the pearl divers I know the details of your agreement with Agloval. I know youre looking for a sailor willing to sail there towards the Dragons Fangs. Did you find one?
He looked at her searchingly for a moment and then suddenly decided.
No he replied I didnt. Not one.
Are they afraid?
Yes they are.
How then do you intend to carry out an exploration if you cant go to sea? How without sailing do you plan to get at the monster that killed the pearl divers?
He took her by the hand and led her from the jetty. They walked slowly along the edge of the sea across the pebbly beach beside the launches pulled up on the shore among the rows of nets hung up on stilts among the curtains of split drying fish being blown by the wind. Geralt unexpectedly found that the poets company did not bother him at all that it was not wearisome or intrusive. Apart from that he hoped that a calm and matter-of-fact conversation would erase the results of that stupid kiss on the terrace. The fact that Essi had come to the jetty filled him with the hope that she did not bear him a grudge. He was content.
Get at the monster he muttered repeating her words. If only I knew how. I know very little about sea monsters.
Interesting. From what I know there are many more monsters in the sea than there are on land both in terms of number and variety of species. It would seem thus that the sea ought to be a great opportunity for witchers to show what they can do.
Well it isnt.
Why?
The expansion of people onto the sea he said clearing his throat and turning his face away hasnt lasted very long. Witchers were needed long ago on the land during the first phase of colonisation. We arent cut out to fight sea-dwelling creatures although you are right the sea is full of all sorts of aggressive filth. But our witcher abilities are insufficient against sea monsters. Those creatures are either too big for us or are too well armoured or are too sure in their element. Or all three.
And the monster that killed the pearl divers? You have no idea what it was?
A kraken perhaps?
No. A kraken would have wrecked the boat but it was intact. And as they said totally full of blood Little Eye swallowed and visibly paled. Dont think Im being a know-all. I grew up by the sea and Ive seen a few things.
In that case what could it have been? A giant squid? It might have dragged those people from the deck…
There wouldnt have been any blood. It wasnt a squid Geralt or a killer whale or a dracoturtle because whatever it was didnt destroy or capsize the boat. Whatever it was went on board and carried out the slaughter there. Perhaps youre making a mistake looking for it in the sea?
The Witcher pondered.
Im beginning to admire you Essi he said. The poet blushed. Youre right. It may have attacked from the air. It may have been an ornithodracon a gryphon a wyvern a flying drake or a forktail. Possibly even a roc—
Excuse me Essi said Look whos coming.
Agloval was approaching along the shore alone his clothes sopping wet. He was visibly angry and flushed with rage on seeing them.
Essi curtseyed slightly Geralt bent his head pressing his fist to his chest. Agloval spat.
I sat on the rocks for three hours almost from daybreak he snarled. She didnt even make an appearance. Three hours like an ass on rocks swept by the waves.
Im sorry… the Witcher muttered.
Youre sorry? the duke exploded. Sorry? Its your fault. You fouled everything up. You spoiled everything.
What did I spoil? I was only working as an interpreter—
To hell with work like that Agloval interrupted angrily showing off his profile. His profile was indeed kingly worthy of being struck on coinage. Verily it would have been better not to hire you. It sounds paradoxical but while we didnt have an interpreter we understood each other better Sheenaz and I if you know what I mean. But now–do you know what theyre saying in town? Rumours are spreading that the pearl divers perished because I enraged the mermaid. That its her revenge.
Nonsense the Witcher commented coldly.
How am I to know that its nonsense? the duke growled. How do I know you didnt tell her something? Do I really know what shes capable of? What monsters she chums around with down in the depths? By all means prove to me that its nonsense. Bring me the head of the beast that killed the pearl divers. Get to work instead of flirting on the beach—
To work? Geralt reacted angrily. How? Am I to go out to sea straddling a barrel? Your Zelest threatened the sailors with torture and the noose but in spite of that no one wants to sail out with me. Zelest himself isnt too keen either. So how—?
What does it bother me how? Agloval yelled interrupting. Thats your problem! What are witchers for if not so that decent folk dont have to wrack their brains about how to rid themselves of monsters? Ive hired you to do the job and I demand you carry it out. If not get out of here before I drive you to the borders of my realm with my whip!
Calm down Your Grace Little Eye said softly but her paleness and trembling hands betrayed her irritation. And please dont threaten Geralt. It so happens that Dandelion and I have several friends. King Ethain of Cidaris to mention but one likes us and our ballads very much. King Ethain is an enlightened monarch and always says that our ballads arent just lively music and rhymes but a way of spreading news that they are a chronicle of humankind. Do you wish Your Grace to be written into the chronicle of humankind? I can have it arranged.
Agloval looked at her for a while with a cold contemptuous gaze.
The pearl divers who died had wives and children he finally said much more quietly and calmly. When hunger afflicts the remaining ones they will put to sea again. Pearl sponge and oyster divers lobster fishers fishermen; all of them. Now they are afraid but hunger will overcome their fear. They will go to sea. But will they return? What do you say to that Geralt? Miss Daven? Id be interested to hear the ballad which will sing of that. A ballad about a witcher standing idly on the shore looking at the blood-spattered decks of boats and weeping children.
Essi blanched even more but raised her head proudly blew away the lock of hair and was just preparing a riposte when Geralt seized her hand and squeezed it stopping her words.
That is enough he said. In this entire flood of words only one has true significance. You hired me Agloval. I accepted the task and shall accomplish it if it is feasible.
Im relying on it the duke said curtly. Then goodbye. My respects Miss Daven.
Essi did not curtsey she only tilted her head. Agloval hauled up his wet trousers and headed off towards the harbour walking unsteadily over the pebbles. Only then did Geralt notice he was still holding the poets hand but she was not trying to free herself at all. He released her hand. Essi slowly returning to her normal colours turned her face towards his.
Its easy to make you take a risk she said. All it takes is a few words about women and children. And so much is said about how unfeeling you witchers are. Geralt Agloval doesnt give a hoot about women children or the elderly. He wants the pearl fishing to begin again because hes losing money every day they dont come back with a catch. Hes taking you for a ride with those starving children and youre ready to risk your life—
Essi he interrupted. Im a witcher. Its my trade to risk my life. Children have nothing to do with it.
You cant fool me.
Why the assumption that I mean to?
Perhaps because if you were the heartless professional you pretend to be you would have tried to push up the price. But you didnt say a word about your fee. Oh never mind enough of all that. Are we going back?
Lets walk on a little.
Gladly. Geralt?
Yes.
I told you I grew up by the sea. I know how to steer a boat and—
Put that out of your head.
Why?
Put that out of your head he repeated sharply.
You might she said have phrased that more politely.
I might have. But you would have taken it as… the Devil only knows what. And I am an unfeeling witcher and heartless professional. I risk my life. Not other peoples.
Essi fell silent. He saw her purse her lips and toss her head. A gust of wind ruffled her hair again and her face was covered for a moment by a confusion of golden curls.
I only wanted to help you she said.
I know. Thank you.
Geralt?
Yes.
What if there is something behind the rumours Agloval was talking about? You know well that mermaids arent always friendly. There have been cases—
I dont believe them.
Sea witches Little Eye continued pensively. Nereids mermen sea nymphs. Who knows what theyre capable of. And Sheenaz… she had reason—
I dont believe it he interrupted. You dont believe or you dont want to believe?
He did not reply.
And you want to appear the cold professional? she asked with a strange smile. Someone who thinks with his sword hilt? If you want Ill tell you what you really are.
I know what I really am.
Youre sensitive she said softly. Deep in your angst-filled soul. Your stony face and cold voice dont deceive me. You are sensitive and your sensitivity makes you fear that whatever you are going to face with sword in hand may have its own arguments may have the moral advantage over you…
No Essi he said slowly. Dont try to make me the subject of a moving ballad a ballad about a witcher with inner conflicts. Perhaps Id like it to be the case but it isnt. My moral dilemmas are resolved for me by my code and education. By my training.
Dont talk like that she said in annoyance. I dont understand why you try to—
Essi he interrupted her again. I dont want you to pick up false notions about me. Im not a knight errant.
You arent a cold and unthinking killer either.
No he agreed calmly. Im not although there are some who think differently. For it isnt my sensitivity and personal qualities that place me higher but the vain and arrogant pride of a professional convinced of his value. A specialist in whom it was instilled that the code of his profession and cold routine is more legitimate than emotion that they protect him against making a mistake which could be made should he become entangled in the dilemmas of Good and Evil of Order and Chaos. No Essi. Its not I that am sensitive but you. After all your profession demands that doesnt it? Its you who became alarmed by the thought that an apparently pleasant mermaid attacked the pearl divers in an act of desperate revenge after being insulted. You immediately look for an excuse for the mermaid extenuating circumstances; you balk at the thought that a witcher hired by the duke will murder an exquisite mermaid just because she dared to yield to emotion. But the Witcher Essi is free of such dilemmas. And of emotion. Even if it turns out that it was the mermaid the Witcher wont kill the mermaid because the code forbids him. The code solves the dilemma for the Witcher.
Little Eye looked at him abruptly lifting up her head.
All dilemmas? she asked quickly.
She knows about Yennefer he thought. She knows. Dandelion you bloody gossip…
They looked at one another.
What is concealed in your deep blue eyes Essi? Curiosity? Fascination with otherness? What are the dark sides of your talent Little Eye?
I apologise she said. The question was foolish. And naive. It hinted that I believed what you were saying. Lets go back. That wind chills to the marrow. Look how rough the sea is.
It is. Do you know whats fascinating Essi?
What?
I was certain the rock where Agloval met his mermaid was nearer the shore and bigger. And now its not visible.
Its the tide Essi said shortly. The water will soon reach all the way to the cliff.
All that way?
Yes. The water rises and falls here considerably well over ten cubits because here in the strait and the mouth of the river there are so-called tidal echoes as the sailors call them.
Geralt looked towards the headland at the Dragons Fangs biting into a roaring foaming breaker.
Essi he asked. And when the tide starts going out?
What?
How far back does the sea go?
But what…? Ah I get it. Yes youre right. It goes back to the line of the shelf.
The line of the what?
Well its like a shelf–flat shallows–forming the seabed which ends with a lip at the edge of the deep waters.
And the Dragons Fangs…
Are right on that lip.
And they are reachable by wading? How long would I have?
I dont know Little Eye frowned. Youd have to ask the locals. But I dont think it would be a good idea. Look there are rocks between the land and the Fangs the entire shore is scored with bays and fjords. When the tide starts going out gorges and basins full of water are formed there. I dont know if—
From the direction of the sea and the barely visible rocks came a splash. And a loud melodic cry.
White Hair! the mermaid called gracefully leaping over the crest of a wave threshing the water with short elegant strokes of her tail.
Sheenaz! he called back waving a hand.
The mermaid swam over to the rocks stood erect in the foaming green water and used both hands to fling back her hair at the same time revealing her torso with all its charms. Geralt glanced at Essi. The girl blushed slightly and with an expression of regret and embarrassment on her face looked for a moment at her own charms which barely protruded beneath her dress.
Where is my man? Sheenaz sang swimming closer. He was meant to have come.
He did. He waited for three hours and then left.
He left? the mermaid said in a high trill of astonishment. He didnt wait? He could not endure three meagre hours? Just as I thought. Not a scrap of sacrifice! Not a scrap! Despicable despicable despicable! And what are you doing here White Hair? Did you come here for a walk with your beloved? Youd make a pretty couple were you not marred by your legs.
She is not my beloved. We barely know each other.
Yes? Sheenaz said in astonishment. Pity. You suit each other you look lovely together. Who is it?
Im Essi Daven poet Little Eye sang with an accent and melody beside which the Witchers voice sounded like the cawing of a crow. Nice to meet you Sheenaz.
The mermaid slapped her hands on the water and laughed brightly.
How gorgeous! she cried. You know our tongue! Upon my word you astonish me you humans. Verily not nearly as much divides us as people say.
The Witcher was no less astonished than the mermaid although he might have guessed that the educated and well-read Essi would know the Elder Speech better than him. It was the language of the elves a euphonious version of which was used by mermaids sea witches and nereids. It also ought to have been clear to him that the melodiousness and complicated intonation pattern of the mermaids speech which for him was a handicap made it easier for Little Eye.
Sheenaz! he called. A few things divide us nevertheless and what occasionally divides us is spilled blood! Who… who killed the pearl divers over there by the two rocks? Tell me!
The mermaid dived down churning the water. A moment later she spurted back out onto the surface again and her pretty little face was contracted and drawn into an ugly grimace.
Dont you dare! she screamed piercingly shrilly. Dont you dare go near the steps! It is not for you! Dont fall foul of them! It is not for you!
What? What isnt for us?
Not for you! Sheenaz yelled falling onto her back on the waves. Splashes of water shot high up. For just a moment longer they saw her forked finned tail flapping over the waves. Then she vanished under the water.
Little Eye tidied her hair which had been ruffled by the wind. She stood motionless with her head bowed.
I didnt know Geralt said clearing his throat that you knew the Elder Speech so well Essi.
You couldnt have known she said with a distinct bitterness in her voice. After all… after all you barely know me.
Geralt Dandelion said looking around and sniffing like a hound. It stinks terribly here dont you think?
Does it? the Witcher sniffed. Ive been in places where it smelled worse. Its only the smell of the sea.
The bard turned his head away and spat between two rocks. The water bubbled in the rocky clefts foaming and soughing exposing gorges full of sea-worn pebbles.
Look how nicely its dried out Geralt. Where has the water gone? What is it with those bloody tides? Where do they come from? Havent you ever thought about it?
No. Ive had other concerns.
I think Dandelion said trembling slightly that down there in the depths at the very bottom of this bloody ocean crouches a huge monster a fat scaly beast a toad with horns on its vile head. And from time to time it draws water into its belly and with the water everything that lives and can be eaten: fish seals turtles–everything. And then having devoured its prey it pukes up the water and we have the tide. What do you think about that?
I think youre a fool. Yennefer once told me that the moon causes the tides.
Dandelion cackled.
What bloody rubbish! What does the moon have to do with the sea? Only dogs howl at the moon. She was having you on Geralt that little liar of yours she put one over on you. Not for the first time either Id say.
The Witcher did not comment. He looked at the boulders glistening with water in the ravines exposed by the tide. The water was still exploding and foaming in them but it looked as though they would get through.
Very well lets get to work he said standing and adjusting his sword on his back. We cant wait any longer or we wont make it back before the tide comes in. Do you still insist on coming with me?
Yes. Subjects for ballads arent fir cones you dont find them under a tree. Aside from that its Poppets birthday tomorrow.
I dont see the link.
Pity. There exists the custom among we–normal–people of giving one another presents on birthdays. I cant afford to buy her anything. So I shall find something for her on the seabed.
A herring? Or a cuttlefish?
Dolt. Ill find some amber perhaps a seahorse or maybe a pretty conch. The point is its a symbol a sign of concern and affection. I like Little Eye and I want to please her. Dont you understand? I thought not. Lets go. You first because there might be a monster down there.
Right. The Witcher slid down from the cliff onto the slippery rocks covered with algae. Ill go first in order to protect you if needs be. As a sign of my concern and affection. Just remember if I shout run like hell and dont get tangled up in my sword. We arent going to gather seahorses. Were going to deal with a monster that murders people.
They set off downwards into the rifts of the exposed seabed in some places wading through the water still swirling in the rocky vents. They splashed around in hollows lined with sand and bladder wrack. To make matters worse it began to rain so they were soon soaked from head to foot. Dandelion kept stopping and digging around in the pebbles and tangles of seaweed.
Oh look Geralt a little fish. Its all red by the Devil. And here look a little eel. And this? What is it? It looks like a great big transparent flea. And this… Oh mother! Geraaalt!
The Witcher turned around at once with his hand on his sword.
It was a human skull white worn smooth by the rocks jammed into a rocky crevice full of sand. But not only sand. Dandelion seeing a lugworm writhing in the eye socket shuddered and made an unpleasant noise. The Witcher shrugged and headed towards the rocky plain exposed by the sea in the direction of the two jagged reefs known as the Dragons Fangs which now looked like mountains. He moved cautiously. The seabed was strewn with sea cucumbers shells and piles of bladder wrack. Large jellyfish swayed and brittle stars whirled in the rock pools and hollows. Small crabs as colourful as hummingbirds fled from them creeping sideways their legs scurrying busily.
Geralt noticed a corpse some way off wedged between the rocks. The drowned mans chest could be seen moving beneath his shirt and the seaweed though in principle there was no longer anything to move it. It was teeming with crabs outside and inside. The body could not have been in the water longer than a day but the crabs had picked it so clean it was pointless examining it closer. The Witcher changed direction without a word giving the corpse a wide berth. Dandelion did not notice anything.
Why but it stinks of rot here he swore trying to catch up with Geralt. He spat and shook water from his bonnet. And its tipping down and Im cold. Ill catch a chill and lose my bloody voice…
Stop moaning. If you want to go back you know the way.
Right beyond the base of the Dragons Fangs stretched out a flat rocky shelf and beyond it was deep water the calmly rippling sea. The limit of the tide.
Ha Geralt Dandelion said looking around. I think that monster of yours had enough sense to withdraw to the high sea with the tide. And I guess you thought itd be lazing about here somewhere waiting for you to hack it to pieces?
Be quiet.
The Witcher approached the edge of the shelf and knelt down cautiously resting his hands on the sharp shells clinging to the rocks. He could not see anything. The water was dark and the surface was cloudy dulled by the drizzle.
Dandelion searched the recesses of the reefs kicking the more aggressive crabs from his legs examining and feeling the dripping rocks bearded with sagging seaweed and specked with coarse colonies of crustaceans and molluscs.
Hey Geralt!
What?
Look at those shells. Theyre pearl oysters arent they?
No.
Know anything about them?
No.
So keep your opinions to yourself until you do know something. They are pearl oysters Im certain. Ill start collecting pearls at least therell be some profit from this expedition not just a cold. Shall I begin Geralt?
Go ahead. The monster attacks pearl divers. Pearl collectors probably fall into the same category.
Am I to be bait?
Start collecting. Take the bigger ones because if you dont find any pearls we can make soup out of them.
Forget it. Ill just collect pearls; fuck the shells. Dammit… Bitch… How do you… bloody… open it? Do you have a knife Geralt?
Havent you even brought a knife?
Im a poet not some knifer. Oh to hell with it Ill put them in a bag and well get the pearls out later. Hey you! Scram!
He kicked off a crab which flew over Geralts head and splashed into the water. The Witcher walked slowly along the edge of the shelf eyes fixed on the black impenetrable water. He heard the rhythmic tapping of the stone Dandelion was using to dislodge the shells from the rock.
Dandelion! Come and look!
The jagged cracked shelf suddenly ended in a level sharp edge which fell downwards at an acute angle. Immense angular regular blocks of white marble overgrown with seaweed molluscs and sea anemones swaying in the water like flowers in the breeze could clearly be seen beneath the surface of the water.
What is it? They look like–like steps.
Because they are steps Dandelion whispered in awe. Ooo theyre steps leading to an underwater city. To the legendary Ys which was swallowed up by the sea. Have you heard the legend of the city of the chasm about Ys-Beneath-The-Waves? I shall write such a ballad the competition wont know whats hit them. I have to see it up close… Look theres some kind of mosaic something is engraved or carved there… Some kind of writing? Move away Geralt.
Dandelion! Thats a trench! Youll slip off…
Never mind. Im wet anyway. See its shallow here barely waist-deep on this first step. And as wide as a ballroom. Oh bloody hell…
Geralt jumped very quickly into the water and grabbed the bard who had fallen in up to his neck.
I tripped on that shit Dandelion said gasping for air recovering himself and lifting a large flat mollusc dripping water from its cobalt blue shell overgrown with threads of algae. Theres loads of these on the steps. Its a pretty colour dont you think? Grab it and shove it into your bag mines already full.
Get out of there the Witcher snapped annoyed. Get back on the shelf this minute Dandelion. This isnt a game.
Quiet. Did you hear that? What was it?
Geralt heard it. The sound was coming from below from under the water. Dull and deep although simultaneously faint soft brief broken off. The sound of a bell.
Its a bloody bell Dandelion whispered clambering out onto the shelf. I was right Geralt. Its the bell of the sunken Ys the bell of the city of monsters muffled by the weight of the depths. Its the damned reminding us…
Will you shut up?
The sound repeated. Considerably closer. … reminding us the bard continued squeezing out the soaking tail of his jerkin of its dreadful fate. That bell is a warning…
The Witcher stopped paying attention to Dandelions voice and concentrated on his other senses. He sensed. He sensed something.
Its a warning Dandelion said sticking the tip of his tongue out as was his custom when he was concentrating. A warning because… hmm… So we would not forget… hmm… hmmm… Ive got it!
The heart of the bell sounds softly it sings a song of death
Of death which can be born more easily than oblivion…
The water right next to the Witcher exploded. Dandelion screamed. The goggle-eyed monster emerging from the foam aimed a broad serrated scythe-like blade at Geralt. Geralts sword was already in his hand from the moment the water had begun to swell so now he merely twisted confidently at the hips and slashed the monster across its drooping scaly dewlap. He immediately turned the other way where another creature was churning up the water. It was wearing a bizarre helmet and something resembling a suit of armour made of tarnished copper. The Witcher parried the blade of the short spear being thrust towards him with a broad sweep of his sword and with the momentum the parry gave him struck across the ichthyoid-reptilian toothy muzzle. He leapt aside towards the edge of the shelf splashing water.
Fly Dandelion!
Give me your hand!
Fly dammit!
Another creature emerged from the water the curved sword whistling in its rough green hands. The Witcher thrust his back against the edge of the shellfish-covered rock assumed a fighting position but the fish-eyed creature did not approach. It was the same height as Geralt. The water also reached to its waist but the impressively puffed-up comb on its head and its dilated gills gave the impression of greater size. The grimace distorting the broad maw armed with teeth was deceptively similar to a cruel smile.
The creature paying no attention to the two twitching bodies floating in the red water raised its sword gripping the long hilt without a cross guard in both hands. Puffing up its comb and gills even more it deftly spun the blade in the air. Geralt heard the light blade hiss and whirr.
The creature took a pace forward sending a wave towards the Witcher. Geralt took a swing and whirled his sword in response. And also took a step taking up the challenge.
The fish-eyed creature deftly twisted its long clawed fingers on the hilt and slowly lowered its arms which were protected by tortoiseshell and copper and plunged them up to its elbows concealing the weapon beneath the water. The Witcher grasped his sword in both hands; his right hand just below the cross guard his left by the pommel and lifted the weapon up and a little to the side above his right shoulder. He looked into the monsters eyes but they were the iridescent eyes of a fish eyes with spherical irises glistening coldly and metallically. Eyes which neither expressed nor betrayed anything. Nothing that might warn of an attack.
From the depths at the bottom of the steps disappearing into the black chasm came the sound of a bell. Closer and closer more and more distinct.
The fish-eyed creature lunged forward pulling its blade from under the water attacking as swiftly as a thought with a montante thrust. Geralt was simply lucky; he had expected the blow to be dealt from the right. He parried with his blade directed downwards powerfully twisting his body and rotated his sword meeting the monsters sword flat. Now everything depended on which of them would twist their fingers more quickly on the hilt who would be first to move from the flat static impasse of the blades to a blow a blow whose force was now being generated by both of them by shifting their bodyweight to the appropriate leg. Geralt already knew they were as fast as each other.
But the fish-eyed creature had longer fingers.
The Witcher struck it in the side above the hips twisted into a half-turn smote pressing down on the blade and easily dodged a wide chaotic desperate and clumsy blow. The monster noiselessly opening its ichthyoid mouth disappeared beneath the water which was pulsating with crimson clouds.
Give me your hand! Quickly! Dandelion yelled. Theyre coming a whole gang of them! I can see them!
The Witcher seized the bards right hand and hauled him out of the water onto the rocky shelf. A broad wave splashed behind him.
The tide had turned.
They fled swiftly pursued by the swelling wave. Geralt looked back and saw numerous other fish-like creatures bursting from the water saw them giving chase leaping nimbly on their muscular legs. Without a word he speeded up.
Dandelion was panting running heavily and splashing around the now knee-high water. He suddenly stumbled and fell sloshing among the bladder wrack supporting himself on trembling arms. Geralt caught him by the belt and hauled him out of the foam now seething all around them.
Run! he cried. Ill hold them back!
Geralt—
Run Dandelion! The waters about to fill the rift and then we wont get out of here! Run for your life!
Dandelion groaned and ran. The Witcher ran after him hoping the monsters would become strung out in the chase. He knew he had no chance taking on the entire group.
They chased him just beside the rift because the water there was deep enough for them to swim while he was clambering the slippery rocks with difficulty wallowing in the foam. In the rift however it was too tight for them to assail him from all sides. He stopped in the basin where Dandelion had found the skull.
He stopped and turned around. And calmed down.
He struck the first with the very tip of his sword where the temple would have been on a man. He split open the belly of the next one which was armed with something resembling a short battle-axe. A third fled.
The Witcher rushed up the gorge but at the same time a surging wave boomed erupting in foam seethed in an eddy in the vent tore him off the rocks and dragged him downwards into the boiling water. He collided with a fishy creature flapping about in the eddy and thrust it away with a kick. Something caught him by his legs and pulled him down towards the seafloor. He hit the rock on his back opened his eyes just in time to see the dark shapes of the creatures two swift blurs. He parried the first blur with his sword and instinctively protected himself from the second by raising his left arm. He felt a blow pain and immediately afterwards the sharp sting of salt. He pushed off from the bottom with his feet splashed upwards towards the surface formed his fingers together and released a Sign. The explosion was dull and stabbed his ears with a brief paroxysm of pain. If I get out of this he thought beating the water with his arms and legs if I get out of this Ill ride to Yen in Vengerberg and Ill try again… If I get out of this…
He thought he could hear the booming of a trumpet. Or a horn.
The tidal wave exploding again in the chimney lifted him up and tossed him out on his belly onto a large rock. Now he could clearly hear a booming horn and Dandelions cries seemingly coming from all sides at once. He snorted the saltwater from his nose and looked around tossing his wet hair from his face.
He was on the shore right where they had set out from. He was lying belly-down on the rocks and a breaker was seething white foam around him.
Behind him in the gorge–now a narrow bay–a large grey dolphin danced on the waves. On its back tossing her wet willow-green hair sat the mermaid. She still had beautiful breasts.
White Hair! she sang waving a hand which was holding a large conical spirally twisting conch. Are you in one piece?
Yes the Witcher said in amazement. The foam around him had become pink. His left arm had stiffened and was stinging from the salt. His jacket sleeve was cut straight and evenly and blood was gushing from the cut. I got out of it he thought I pulled it off again. But no Im not going anywhere.
He saw Dandelion who was running towards him stumbling over the wet pebbles.
Ive held them back! the mermaid sang and sounded the conch again. But not for long! Flee and return here no more White Hair! The sea… is not for you!
I know! he shouted back. I know. Thank you Sheenaz!
VII
Dandelion Little Eye said tearing the end of the bandage with her teeth and tying a knot on Geralts wrist. Explain to me how a pile of snail shells ended up at the bottom of the stairs? Drouhards wife is clearing them up right now and is making it clear what she thinks of you two.
Shells? Dandelion asked. What shells? I have no idea. Perhaps some passing ducks dropped them?
Geralt smiled turning his head toward the shadow. He smiled at the memory of Dandelions curses; he had spent the entire afternoon opening shells and rummaging around in the slippery flesh during which process he had nicked himself and soiled his shirt but hadnt found a single pearl. And no small wonder as they werent pearl oysters at all but ordinary scallops and mussels. They abandoned the idea of making soup from the shellfish when Dandelion opened the first shell; the mollusc looked unappealing and stank to high heaven.
Little Eye finished bandaging him and sat down on an upturned tub. The Witcher thanked her examining his neatly bandaged arm. The wound was deep and quite long extending as far as the elbow and intensely painful when he moved it. She had put on a makeshift dressing by the seashore but before they had got back it had begun to bleed again. Just before the girl arrived Geralt had poured a coagulating elixir onto his mutilated forearm and boosted it with an anaesthetic elixir and Essi had caught them just as he and Dandelion were suturing the wound using a fishing line tied to a hook. Little Eye swore at them and got down to making a dressing herself while Dandelion regaled her with a colourful tale of the fight several times reserving himself the exclusive right to compose a ballad about the whole incident. Essi naturally flooded Geralt with an avalanche of questions which he was unable to answer. She took that badly and evidently had the impression he was concealing something from her. She became sullen and ceased her questioning.
Agloval already knows she said. You were seen returning and Mrs Drouhard ran off to spread the word when she saw the blood on the stairs. The people dashed towards the rocks hoping the sea would toss something out. Theyre still hanging around there but havent found anything from what I know.
Nor will they the Witcher said. I shall visit Agloval tomorrow but ask him if you would to forbid people from hanging around the Dragons Fangs. Just not a word please about those steps or Dandelions fantasies about the city of Ys. Treasure and sensation hunters would immediately go and therell be further deaths—
Im not a gossip Essi said sulkily sharply tossing her lock from her forehead. If I ask you something it isnt in order to dash off to the well at once and blab it to the washerwomen.
Im sorry.
I must go Dandelion suddenly said. Ive got a rendezvous with Akeretta. Geralt Im taking your jerkin because mine is incredibly filthy and wet.
Everything here is wet Little Eye said sneeringly nudging the articles of clothing strewn around with the tip of her shoe in disgust. How can you? They need to be hung up and properly dried… Youre dreadful.
Itll dry off by itself Dandelion pulled on Geralts damp jacket and examined the silver studs on the sleeves with delight.
Dont talk rubbish. And whats this? Oh no that bag is still full of sludge and seaweed! And this–whats this? Yuck!
Geralt and Dandelion silently observed the cobalt blue shell Essi was holding between two fingers. They had forgotten. The mollusc was slightly open and clearly reeked.
Its a present the troubadour said moving back towards the door. Its your birthday tomorrow isnt it Poppet? Well thats a present for you.
This?
Pretty isnt it? Dandelion sniffed it and added quickly. Its from Geralt. He chose it for you. Oh is that the time? Farewell…
Little Eye was quiet for a moment after he had gone. The Witcher looked at the stinking shellfish and felt ashamed. Of Dandelion and of himself.
Did you remember my birthday? Essi asked slowly holding the shell at arms length. Really?
Give it to me he said sharply. He got up from the palliasse protecting his bandaged arm. I apologise for that idiot…
No she protested removing a small knife from a sheath at her belt. It really is a pretty shell Ill keep it as a memento. It only needs cleaning after Ive got rid of the… contents. Ill throw them out of the window the cats can eat them.
Something clattered on the floor and rolled away. Geralt widened his pupils and saw what it was long before Essi.
It was a pearl. An exquisitely iridescent and shimmering pearl of faintly blue colour as big as a swollen pea.
By the Gods. Little Eye had also caught sight of it. Geralt… A pearl!
A pearl he laughed. And so you did get a present Essi. Im glad.
Geralt I cant accept it. That pearl is worth…
Its yours he interrupted. Dandelion though he plays the fool really did remember your birthday. He really wanted to please you. He talked about it talked aloud about it. Well fate heard him and did what had to be done.
And you Geralt?
Me?
Did you… also want to please me? That pearl is so beautiful… It must be hugely valuable–dont you regret it?
Im pleased you like it. And if I regret anything its that there was only one. And that…
Yes?
That I havent known you as long as Dandelion long enough to be able to know and remember your birthday. To be able to give you presents and please you. To be able to call you Poppet.
She moved closer and suddenly threw her arms around his neck. He nimbly and swiftly anticipated her movement dodged her lips and kissed her coldly on the cheek embracing her with his uninjured arm clumsily with reserve gently. He felt the girl stiffen and slowly move back but only to the length of her arms which were still resting on his shoulders. He knew what she was waiting for but did not do it. He did not draw her towards him.
Essi let him go and turned towards the open dirty little window.
Of course she said suddenly. You barely know me. I forgot that you barely know me.
Essi he said after a moments silence. I—
I barely know you either she blurted interrupting him. What of it? I love you. I cant help it. Not at all.
Essi!
Yes. I love you Geralt. I dont care what you think. Ive loved you from the moment I saw you at that engagement party…
She broke off lowering her head.
She stood before him and Geralt regretted it was her and not the fish-eyed creature with a sword who had been hidden beneath the water. He had stood a chance against that creature. But against her he had none.
You arent saying anything she said. Nothing not a word.
Im tired he thought and bloody weak. I need to sit down Im feeling dizzy Ive lost some blood and havent eaten anything… I have to sit down. Damned little attic he thought I hope it gets struck by lightning and burns down during the next storm. And theres no bloody furniture not even two stupid chairs and a table which divides you across which you can so easily and safely talk; you can even hold hands. But I have to sit down on the palliasse have to ask her to sit down beside me. And the palliasse stuffed with bean stalks is dangerous you cant escape from it take evasive action.
Sit beside me Essi.
She sat down. Reluctantly. Tactfully. Far away. Too close.
When I found out she whispered interrupting the long silence when I heard that Dandelion had dragged you onto the beach bleeding I ran out of the house like a mad thing rushed blindly paying no attention to anything. And then… Do you know what I thought? That it was magic that you had cast a spell on me that you had secretly treacherously bewitched me spellbound me with your wolfish medallion with the evil eye. Thats what I thought but I didnt stop kept running because I understood that I desire… I desire to fall under your spell. And the reality turned out to be more awful. You didnt cast any spell on me you didnt use any charms. Why Geralt? Why didnt you bewitch me?
He was silent.
If it had been magic she said it would all be so simple and easy. I would have succumbed to your power and Id be happy. But this… I must… I dont know whats happening to me…
Dammit he thought if Yennefer feels like I do now when shes with me I feel sorry for her. And I shall never be astonished again. I will never hate her again… Never again.
Because perhaps Yennefer feels what Im feeling now feels a profound certainty that I ought to fulfil what it is impossible to fulfil even more impossible to fulfil than the relationship between Agloval and Sheenaz. Certainty that a little sacrifice isnt enough here; youd have to sacrifice everything and thered still be no way of knowing if that would be enough. No I wont continue to hate Yennefer for not being able and not wanting to give me more than a little sacrifice. Now I know that a little sacrifice is a hell of a lot.
Geralt Little Eye moaned drawing her head into her shoulders. Im so ashamed. Im ashamed of what Im feeling its like an accursed infirmity like malaria like being unable to breathe…
He was silent.
I always thought it was a beautiful and noble state of mind noble and dignified even if it makes one unhappy. After all Ive composed so many ballads about it. And it is organic Geralt meanly and heartbreakingly organic. Someone who is ill or who has drunk poison might feel like this. Because like someone who has drunk poison one is prepared to do anything in exchange for an antidote. Anything. Even be humiliated.
Essi. Please…
Yes. I feel humiliated humiliated by having confessed everything to you disregarding the dignity that demands one suffers in silence. By the fact that my confession caused you embarrassment. I feel humiliated by the fact that youre embarrassed. But I couldnt have behaved any differently. Im powerless. At your mercy like someone whos bedridden. Ive always been afraid of illness of being weak helpless hopeless and alone. Ive always been afraid of sickness always believing it the worst thing that could befall me…
He was silent.
I know she groaned again. I know I ought to be grateful to you for… for not taking advantage of the situation. But Im not grateful to you. And Im ashamed of it. For I hate your silence your terrified eyes. I hate you. For staying silent. For not lying for not… And I hate her that sorceress of yours Id happily stab her for… I hate her. Make me go Geralt. Order me to leave here. For of my own free will I cannot but I want to get out of here go to the city to a tavern… I want to have my revenge on you for my shame for the humiliation Ill go to the first man I find…
Dammit he thought hearing her voice dropping like a rag ball rolling down the stairs. Shell burst into tears he thought theres no doubt shell burst into tears. What to do what to bloody do?
Essis hunched up shoulders were trembling hard. The girl turned her head away and began to weep crying softly dreadfully calmly and unrelentingly.
I dont feel anything he noticed with horror nothing not the smallest emotion. That fact that I will embrace her is a deliberate measured response not a spontaneous one. Ill hug her for I feel as though I ought to not because I want to. I feel nothing.
When he embraced her she stopped crying immediately wiped away her tears shaking her head forcefully and turning away so that he could not see her face. And then she pressed herself to him firmly burying her head in his chest.
A little sacrifice he thought just a little sacrifice. For this will calm her a hug a kiss calm caresses. She doesnt want anything more. And even if she did what of it? For a little sacrifice a very little sacrifice is beautiful and worth… Were she to want more… It would calm her. A quiet calm gentle act of love. And I… Why it doesnt matter because Essi smells of verbena not lilac and gooseberry doesnt have cool electrifying skin. Essis hair is not a black tornado of gleaming curls Essis eyes are gorgeous soft warm and cornflower blue; they dont blaze with a cold unemotional deep violet. Essi will fall asleep afterwards turn her head away open her mouth slightly Essi will not smile in triumph. For Essi…
Essi is not Yennefer.
And that is why I cannot. I cannot find that little sacrifice inside myself.
Please Essi dont cry.
I wont she said moving very slowly away from him. I wont. I understand. It cannot be any other way.
They said nothing sitting beside each other on the palliasse stuffed with bean stalks. Evening was approaching.
Geralt she suddenly said and her voice trembled. But perhaps… Perhaps it would be like it was with that shell with that curious gift? Perhaps we could find a pearl? Later? When some time has passed?
I can see that pearl he said with effort set in silver in a little silver flower with intricate petals. I see it around your neck on a delicate silver chain worn like I wear my medallion. That will be your talisman Essi. A talisman which will protect you from all evil.
My talisman she repeated lowering her head. My pearl which I shall set in silver and from which I shall never part. My jewel which I was given instead of… Can a talisman like that bring me luck?
Yes Essi. Be sure of it.
Can I stay here a little longer? With you?
You may.
Twilight was approaching and dusk falling and they were sitting on a palliasse stuffed with bean stalks in the garret where there was no furniture where there was only a wooden tub and an unlit candle on the floor in a puddle of hardened wax.
They sat in utter silence for a very long time. And then Dandelion came. They heard him approaching strumming his lute and humming to himself. Dandelion entered saw them and did not say anything not a word. Essi also said nothing stood up and went out without looking at them.
Dandelion did not say a word. But the Witcher saw in his eyes the words that remained unsaid.
An intelligent race Agloval repeated pensively resting an elbow on the armrest and his fist on his chin. An underwater civilisation. Fishlike people living on the seabed. Steps leading to the depths. Geralt you take me for a bloody gullible duke.
Little Eye standing beside Dandelion snarled angrily. Dandelion shook his head in disbelief. Geralt was not in the least bothered.
It makes no difference to me he said quietly if you believe me or not. It is however my duty to warn you. Any boat that sails towards the Dragons Fangs or people who appear there when the tide is out are in danger. Mortal danger. If you want to find out if its true if you want to risk it thats your business. Im simply warning you.
Ha the steward Zelest who was sitting in a window seat behind Agloval suddenly said. If they are monsters the like of elves or other goblins we dont need to worry. We feared it was something worse or God save us something magical. From what the Witcher says they are some kind of sea drowners or other sea monsters. There are ways of dealing with drowners. I heard tell that one sorcerer gave some drowners short shrift in Lake Mokva. He poured a small barrel of magical philtre into the water and did for the fuckers. Didnt leave a trace.
Thats true Drouhard said who up to then had been silent. There wasnt a trace. Nor a trace of bream pike crayfish or mussels. Even the waterweed on the lake floor rotted away and the alders on the bank withered.
Capital Agloval said derisively. Thank you for that excellent suggestion Zelest. Do you have any more?
Aye fair enough the steward said blushing. The wizard overdid it a mite with his wand waved it about a jot too much. But we ought to manage without wizards too Your Grace. The Witcher says that one can fight those monsters and also kill em. Thats war sire. Like the old days. Nothing new there eh? Werelynxes lived in the mountains and where are they now? Wild elves and eerie wives still roam the forests but therell soon be an end to that. Well secure what is ours. As our granddaddies…
And only my grandchildren will see the pearls? The duke grimaced. It is too long to wait Zelest.
Well it wont be that bad. Seems to me its like this: two boats of archers to each boat of divers. Well soon learn those monsters some sense. Learn them some fear. Am I right Witcher sir?
Geralt looked coldly at him but did not respond.
Agloval turned his head away showing his noble profile and bit his lip. Then he looked at the Witcher narrowing his eyes and frowning.
You didnt complete your task Geralt he said. You fouled things up again. You had good intentions I cant deny that. But I dont pay for good intentions. I pay for results. For the effect. And the effect excuse the expression is shitty. So you earn shit.
Marvellous Your Grace Dandelion jibed. Pity you werent with us at the Dragons Fangs. The Witcher and I might have given you the opportunity for an encounter with one of those from the sea sword in hand. Perhaps then you would understand what this is about and stop bickering about payment—
Like a fishwife Little Eye interjected.
I am not accustomed to bickering bargaining or discussing Agloval said calmly. I said I shall not pay you a penny Geralt. The agreement ran: remove the danger remove the threat enable the fishing of pearls without any risk to people. But you? You come and tell me about an intelligent race from the seabed. You advise me to stay away from the place which brings me profit. What did you do? You reputedly killed… How many?
It matters not how many Geralt said blanching slightly. At least not to you Agloval.
Precisely. Particularly since there is no proof. If you had at least brought the right hands of those fish-toads who knows perhaps I would have splashed out on the normal fee my forester takes for a pair of wolfs ears.
Well the Witcher said coldly. Im left with no choice but to say farewell.
You are mistaken the duke said. Something does remain. Permanent work for quite decent coin and lodgings. The position and ticket of skipper of my armed guard which from now on will accompany the divers. It does not have to be forever but only until your reputed intelligent race gains enough good sense to keep well away from my boats to avoid them like the plague. What do you say?
No thank you I decline the Witcher grimaced. A job like that doesnt suit me. I consider waging war against other races idiocy. Perhaps its excellent sport for bored and jaded dukes. But not for me.
Oh how proud Agloval smiled. How haughty. You reject offers in a way some kings wouldnt be ashamed of. You give up decent money with the air of a wealthy man after a lavish dinner. Geralt? Did you have lunch today? No? And tomorrow? And the day after? I see little chance Witcher very little. Its difficult for you to find work normally and now with your arm in a sling—
How dare you! Little Eye cried shrilly. How dare you speak like that to him Agloval! The arm he now carries in a sling was cut carrying out your mission! How can you be so base—
Stop it Geralt said. Stop Essi. Theres no point.
Not true she said angrily. There is a point. Someone has to tell it straight to this self-appointed duke who took advantage of the fact that no one was challenging him for the title deed to rule this scrap of rocky coastline and who now thinks he has the right to insult other people.
Agloval flushed and tightened his lips but said nothing and did not move.
Yes Agloval Essi continued clenching her shaking hands into fists. The opportunity to insult other people amuses and pleases you. You delight in the contempt you can show the Witcher who is prepared to risk his neck for your money. You should know the Witcher mocks your contempt and slights that they do not make the faintest impression on him. He doesnt even notice them. No the Witcher does not even feel what your servants and subjects Zelest and Drouhard feel and they feel shame deep burning shame. The Witcher doesnt feel what Dandelion and I feel and we feel revulsion. Do you know why that is Agloval? Ill tell you. The Witcher knows he is superior. He is worthier than you. And that gives him his strength.
Essi fell silent and lowered her head but not quickly enough for Geralt not to see the tear which sparkled in the corner of her gorgeous eye. The girl touched the little flower with silver petals hanging around her neck the flower in the centre of which nestled a large sky blue pearl. The little flower had intricate plaited petals executed in masterly fashion. Drouhard the Witcher thought had come up trumps. The craftsman he had recommended did a good job. And had not taken a penny from them. Drouhard had paid for everything.
So Your Grace Little Eye continued raising her head dont make a fool of yourself by offering the Witcher the role of a mercenary in an army you plan to field against the ocean. Dont expose yourself to ridicule for your suggestion could only prompt mirth. Dont you understand yet? You can pay the Witcher for carrying out a task you can hire him to protect people from evil to remove the danger that threatens them. But you cannot buy the Witcher you cannot use him to your own ends. Because the Witcher–even wounded and hungry–is better than you. Has more worth. That is why he scorns your meagre offer. Do you understand?
No Miss Daven Agloval said coldly. I do not understand. On the contrary I understand less and less. And the fundamental thing I indeed do not understand is why I have not yet ordered your entire trio hanged after having you thrashed with a scourge and scorched with red-hot irons. You Miss Daven are endeavouring to give the impression of somebody who knows everything. Tell me then why I do not do that.
As you please the poet shot back at once. You do not do that Agloval because somewhere deep inside glimmers in you a little spark of decency a scrap of honour not yet stifled by the vainglory of a nouveau riche and petty trader. Inside Agloval. At the bottom of your heart. A heart which after all is capable of loving a mermaid.
Agloval went as white as a sheet and gripped the armrests of his chair. Bravo the Witcher thought bravo Essi wonderful. He was proud of her. But at the same time he felt sorrow tremendous sorrow.
Go away Agloval said softly. Go away. Wherever you wish. Leave me in peace.
Farewell duke Essi said. And on parting accept some good advice. Advice which the Witcher ought to be giving you; but I dont want him to stoop to giving you advice. So Ill do it for him.
Very well.
The ocean is immense Agloval. No one has explored what lies beyond the horizon if anything is there at all. The ocean is bigger than any wilderness deep into which you have driven the elves. It is less accessible than any mountains or ravines where you have massacred werelynxes. And on the floor of the ocean dwells a race which uses weapons and knows the arcana of metalworking. Beware Agloval. If archers begin to sail with the pearl divers you will begin a war with something you dont understand. What you mean to disturb may turn out to be a hornets nest. I advise you leave them the sea for the sea is not for you. You dont know and will never know whither lead those steps which go down to the bottom of the Dragons Fangs.
You are mistaken Miss Daven Agloval said calmly. We shall learn whither lead those steps. Further we shall descend those steps. We shall find out what is on that side of the ocean if there is anything there at all. And we shall draw from the ocean everything we can. And if not we then our grandsons will do it or our grandsons grandsons. It is just a matter of time. Yes we shall do it though the ocean will run red with blood. And you know it Essi O wise Essi who writes the chronicles of humanity in your ballads. Life is not a ballad O poor little gorgeous-eyed poet lost among her fine words. Life is a battle. And we were taught that struggle by these witchers whose worth is greater than ours. It was they who showed us the way who paved the way for us. They strewed the path with the corpses of those who stood in the way of humans and defended that world from us. We Essi are only continuing that battle. It is we not your ballads who create the chronicles of humanity. And we no longer need witchers and now nothing will stop us. Nothing.
Essi blanched blew her lock away and tossed her head. Nothing Agloval?
Nothing Essi.
The poet smiled.
A sudden noise shouts and stamping came from the anterooms. Pages and guards rushed into the chamber. They knelt or bowed by the door in two rows. Sheenaz stood in the doorway.
Her willow-green hair was elaborately coiffured pinned up with a marvellous circlet encrusted with coral and pearls. She was in a gown the colour of seawater with frills as white as foam. The gown had a plunging neckline so that the mermaids charms though partly concealed and decorated with a necklace of nephrite and lapis lazuli still earned the highest admiration.
Sheenaz… Agloval groaned dropping to his knees. My… Sheenaz…
The mermaid slowly came closer and her gait was soft and graceful as fluid as an approaching wave.
She stopped in front of the duke flashed her delicate white little teeth in a smile then quickly gathered her gown in her small hands and lifted it quite high high enough for everyone to be able to judge the quality of the marine sorceress the sea witch. Geralt swallowed. There was no doubt: the sea witch knew what shapely legs were and how to make them.
Ha! Dandelion cried. My ballad… It is just like in my ballad… She has gained legs for him but has lost her voice!
I have lost nothing Sheenaz said melodiously in the purest Common Speech. For the moment. I am as good as new after the operation.
You speak our tongue?
What maynt I? How are you White Hair? Oh and your beloved one Essi Daven if I recall is here. Do you know her better or still barely?
Sheenaz… Agloval groaned heartrendingly moving towards her on his knees. My love! My beloved… my only… And so at last. At last Sheenaz!
With a graceful movement the mermaid proffered her hand to be kissed.
Indeed. Because I love you too you loon. And what kind of love would it be if the one who loves were not capable of a little sacrifice?
They left Bremervoord early on a cool morning among fog which dulled the intensity of the red sun rolling out from below the horizon. They rode as a threesome as they had agreed. They did not talk about it they were making no plans–they simply wanted to be together. For some time.
They left the rocky headland bade farewell to the precipitous jagged cliffs above the beaches the fantastic limestone formations carved out by the sea and gales. But as they rode into the green flower-strewn valley of Dol Adalatte they still had the scent of the sea in their nostrils and in their ears the roar of breakers and the piercing urgent cries of seagulls.
Dandelion talked ceaselessly hopping from one subject to another and virtually not finishing any. He talked about the Land of Barsa where a stupid custom required girls to guard their chastity until marriage; about the iron birds of the island of Inis Porhoet; about living water and dead water; about the taste and curious properties of the sapphire wine called cill; and about the royal quadruplets of Ebbing–dreadful exasperating brats called Putzi Gritzi Mitzi and Juan Pablo Vassermiller. He talked about new trends in poetry promoted by his rivals which were in Dandelions opinion phantoms simulating the movements of the living.
Geralt remained silent. Essi also said nothing or replied in monosyllables. The Witcher felt her gaze on him. He avoided her eyes.
They crossed the River Adalatte on the ferry having to pull the ropes themselves since the ferryman happened to be in a pathetic drunken state of deathly white rigid-trembling gazing-into-the-abyss pallor unable to let go of the pillar in his porch which he was clinging to with both hands and answering every question they asked him with a single word which sounded like voorg.
The Witcher had taken a liking to the country on the far side of the Adalatte; the riverside villages were mainly surrounded by palisades which portended a certain likelihood of finding work.
Little Eye walked over to him while they were watering the horses in the early afternoon taking advantage of the fact that Dandelion had wandered off. The Witcher was not quick enough. She surprised him.
Geralt she said softly. I cant… I cant bear this. I dont have the strength.
He tried to avoid the necessity of looking her in the eye but she would not let him. She stood in front of him toying with the sky blue pearl set in a small silver flower hanging around her neck. She stood like that and he wished again that it was the fish-eyed creature with its sword hidden beneath the water in front of him.
Geralt… We have to do something about this dont we?
She waited for his answer. For some words. For a little sacrifice. But the Witcher had nothing he could sacrifice and he knew it. He did not want to lie. And he truly did not have it in him because he could not find the courage to cause her pain.
The situation was saved by the sudden appearance of Dandelion dependable Dandelion. Dandelion with his dependable tact.
Of course! he yelled and heaved into the water the stick he had been using to part the rushes and the huge riverside nettles. And of course you have to do something about it its high time! I have no wish to watch what is going on between you any longer! What do you expect from him Poppet? The impossible? And you Geralt what are you hoping for? That Little Eye will read your thoughts like… like the other one? And she will settle for that and you will conveniently stay quiet not having to explain declare or deny anything? And not have to reveal yourself? How much time how many facts do you both need to understand? And when youll want to recall it in a few years in your memories? I mean we have to part tomorrow dammit!
Ive had enough by the Gods Im up to here with you up to here! Very well listen: Im going to break myself off a hazel rod and go fishing and you will have some time to yourselves youll be able to tell each other everything. Tell each other everything try to understand each other. It is not as difficult as you think. And after that by the Gods do it. Do it with him Poppet. Do it with her Geralt and be good to her. And then youll either bloody get over it or…
Dandelion turned around rapidly and walked away breaking reeds and cursing. He made a rod from a hazel branch and horsehair and fished until dusk fell.
After he had walked off Geralt and Essi stood for a long time leaning against a misshapen willow tree bent over the water. They stood holding hands. Then the Witcher spoke spoke softly for a long time and Little Eyes little eye was full of tears.
And then by the Gods they did it she and he.
And everything was all right.
The next day they organised something of a ceremonial supper. Essi and Geralt bought a dressed lamb in a village they passed through. While they were haggling Dandelion surreptitiously stole some garlic onions and carrots from the vegetable patch behind the cottage. As they were riding away they also swiped a pot from the fence behind the smithy. The pot was a little leaky but the Witcher soldered it using the Igni Sign.
The supper took place in a clearing deep in the forest. The fire crackled merrily and the pot bubbled. Geralt carefully stirred the stew with a star-shaped stirrer made from the top of a spruce tree stripped of bark. Dandelion peeled the onions and carrots. Little Eye who had no idea about cooking made the time more pleasant by playing the lute and singing racy couplets.
It was a ceremonial supper. For they were going to part in the morning. In the morning each of them was going to go their own way; in search of something they already had. But they did not know they had it they could not even imagine it. They could not imagine where the roads they were meant to set off on the next morning would lead. Each of them travelling separately.
After they had eaten and drunk the beer Drouhard had given them they gossiped and laughed and Dandelion and Essi held a singing contest. Geralt lay on a makeshift bed of spruce branches with his hands under his head and thought he had never heard such beautiful voices or such beautiful ballads. He thought about Yennefer. He thought about Essi too. He had a presentiment that…
At the end Little Eye and Dandelion sang the celebrated duet of Cynthia and Vertvern a wonderful song of love beginning with the words: Many tears have I shed… It seemed to Geralt that even the trees bent down to listen to the two of them.
Then Little Eye smelling of verbena lay down beside him squeezed in under his arm wriggled her head onto his chest sighed maybe once or twice and fell peacefully asleep. The Witcher fell asleep much much later.
Dandelion staring into the dying embers sat much longer alone quietly strumming his lute.
It began with a few bars from which an elegant soothing melody emerged. The lyric suited the melody and came into being simultaneously with it the words blending into the music becoming set in it like insects in translucent golden lumps of amber.
The ballad told of a certain witcher and a certain poet. About how the witcher and the poet met on the seashore among the crying of seagulls and how they fell in love at first sight. About how beautiful and powerful was their love. About how nothing–not even death–was able to destroy that love and part them.
Dandelion knew that few would believe the story told by the ballad but he was not concerned. He knew ballads were not written to be believed but to move their audience.
Several years later Dandelion could have changed the contents of the ballad and written about what had really occurred. He did not. For the true story would not have moved anyone. Who would have wanted to hear that the Witcher and Little Eye parted and never ever saw each other again? About how four years later Little Eye died of the smallpox during an epidemic raging in Vizima? About how he Dandelion had carried her out in his arms between corpses being cremated on funeral pyres and had buried her far from the city in the forest alone and peaceful and as she had asked buried two things with her: her lute and her sky blue pearl. The pearl from which she was never parted.
No Dandelion stuck with his first version. And he never sang it. Never. To no one.
Right before the dawn while it was still dark a hungry vicious werewolf crept up to their camp but saw that it was Dandelion so he listened for a moment and then went on his way.
THE SWORD OF DESTINY
He found the first body around noon.
The sight of victims of violent death seldom shocked the Witcher; much more often he looked at corpses with total indifference. This time he was not indifferent.
The boy was around fifteen. He was lying on his back legs sprawled his face frozen in a grimace of terror. In spite of that Geralt knew the boy had died at once had not suffered and probably had not even known he was dying. The arrow had struck him in the eye and was driven deep into the skull through the occipital bone. The arrow was fletched with striped pheasant flight feathers dyed yellow. The shaft stuck up above the tufts of grass.
Geralt looked around and quickly and easily found what he was hunting for. A second identical arrow lodged in the trunk of a pine tree around six paces behind the corpse. He knew what had happened. The boy had not understood the warning and hearing the whistle and thud of the arrow had panicked and begun to run the wrong way. Towards the one who had ordered him to stop and withdraw at once. The hissing venomous feathered whistle and the short thud of the arrowhead cutting into the wood. Not a step further man said that whistle and that thud. Begone man get out of Brokilon at once. You have captured the whole world man you are everywhere. Everywhere you introduce what you call modernity the era of change what you call progress. But we want neither you nor your progress here. We do not desire the changes you bring. We do not desire anything you bring. A whistle and a thud. Get out of Brokilon!
Get out of Brokilon thought Geralt. Man. No matter that you are fifteen and struggling through the forest insane with fear unable to find your way home. No matter that you are seventy and have to gather brushwood because otherwise they will drive you from the cottage for being useless they will stop giving you food. No matter that you are six and you were lured by a carpet of little blue flowers in a sunny clearing. Get out of Brokilon! A whistle and a thud.
Long ago thought Geralt before they shot to kill they gave two warnings. Even three.
Long ago he thought continuing on his way. Long ago.
Well thats progress.
The forest did not seem to deserve the dreadful notoriety it enjoyed. It was terribly wild and arduous to march through but it was the commonplace arduousness of a dense forest where every gap every patch of sunlight filtered by the boughs and leafy branches of huge trees was immediately exploited by dozens of young birches alders and hornbeams by brambles junipers and ferns their tangle of shoots covering the crumbly mire of rotten wood dry branches and decayed trunks of the oldest trees the ones that had lost the fight the ones that had lived out their lifespan. The thicket however did not generate the ominous weighty silence which would have suited the place more. No Brokilon was alive. Insects buzzed lizards rustled the grass underfoot iridescent beetles scuttled thousands of spiders tugged webs glistening with drops of water woodpeckers thumped tree trunks with sharp series of raps and jays screeched.
Brokilon was alive.
But the Witcher did not let himself be deceived. He knew where he was. He remembered the boy with the arrow in his eye. He had occasionally seen white bones with red ants crawling over them among the moss and pine needles.
He walked on cautiously but swiftly. The trail was fresh. He hoped to reach and send back the men walking in front of him. He deluded himself that it was not too late.
But it was.
He would not have noticed the next corpse had it not been for the sunlight reflecting on the blade of the short sword it was gripping. It was a grown man. His simple clothing coloured a practical dun indicated his lowly status. His garments–not counting the blood stains surrounding the two feathers sticking into his chest–were clean and new so he could not have been a common servant.
Geralt looked around and saw a third body dressed in a leather jacket and short green cape. The ground around the dead mans legs was churned up the moss and pine needles were furrowed right down to the sand. There was no doubt; this man had taken a long time to die.
He heard a groan.
He quickly parted the juniper bushes and saw the deep tree throw they were concealing. A powerfully built man with black curly hair and beard contrasting with the dreadful downright deathly pallor of his face was lying in the hollow on the exposed roots of the pine. His pale deerskin kaftan was red with blood.
The Witcher jumped into the hollow. The wounded man opened his eyes.
Geralt… he groaned. O ye Gods… I must be dreaming…
Frexinet? the Witcher asked in astonishment. You here?
Yes me… Ooooow…
Dont move Geralt said kneeling beside him. Where were you hit? I cant see the arrow…
It passed… right through. I broke off the arrowhead and pulled it out… Listen Geralt—
Be quiet Frexinet or youll choke on your blood. You have a punctured lung. A pox on it I have to get you out of here. What the bloody hell were you doing in Brokilon? Its dryad territory their sanctuary no one gets out of here alive. I cant believe you didnt know that.
Later… Frexinet groaned and spat blood. Ill tell you later… Now get me out. Oh a pox on it. Have a care… Oooooow…
I cant do it Geralt said straightening up and looking around. Youre too heavy.
Leave me the wounded man grunted. Leave me too bad… But save her… by the Gods save her…
Who?
The princess… Oh… Find her Geralt.
Lie still dammit! Ill knock something up and haul you out.
Frexinet coughed hard and spat again; a viscous stretching thread of blood hung from his chin. The Witcher cursed vaulted out of the hollow and looked around. He needed two young saplings. He moved quickly towards the edge of the clearing where he had seen a clump of alders.
A whistle and thud.
Geralt froze to the spot. The arrow buried in a tree trunk at head height had hawk feather fletchings. He looked at the angle of the ashen shaft and knew where it had been shot from. About four dozen paces away there was another hollow a fallen tree and a tangle of roots sticking up in the air still tightly gripping a huge lump of sandy earth. There was a dark mass of blackthorn there amid the lighter stripes of birches. He could not see anyone. He knew he would not.
He raised both hands very slowly.
Ceádmil! Vá an Eithné meáth e Duén Canell! Esseá Gwynbleidd! This time he heard the soft twang of the bowstring and saw the arrow for it had been shot for him to see. Powerfully. He watched it soar upwards saw it reach its apex and then fall in a curve. He did not move. The arrow plunged into the moss almost vertically two paces from him. Almost immediately a second lodged next to the first at exactly the same angle. He was afraid he might not see the next one.
Meáth Eithné! he called again. Esseá Gwynbleidd!
Gláeddyv vort! A voice like a breath of wind. A voice not an arrow. He was alive. He slowly unfastened his belt buckle drew his sword well away from himself and threw it down. A second dryad emerged noiselessly from behind a fir trunk wrapped around with juniper bushes no more than ten paces from him. Although she was small and very slim the trunk seemed thinner. He had no idea how he had not seen her as he approached. Perhaps her outfit had disguised her; a patchwork which accentuated her shapely form sewn weirdly from scraps of fabric in numerous shades of green and brown strewn with leaves and pieces of bark. Her hair tied with a black scarf around her forehead was olive green and her face was criss-crossed with stripes painted using walnut-shell dye.
Naturally her bowstring was taut and she was aiming an arrow at him.
Eithné… he began.
Tháess aep!
He obediently fell silent standing motionless holding his arms away from his trunk. The dryad did not lower her bow.
Dunca! she cried. Braenn! Caemm vort!
The one who had shot the arrows earlier darted out from the blackthorn and slipped over the upturned trunk nimbly clearing the depression. Although there was a pile of dry branches in it Geralt did not hear even one snap beneath her feet. He heard a faint murmur close behind something like the rustling of leaves in the wind. He knew there was a third.
It was that one dashing out from behind him who picked up his sword. Her hair was the colour of honey and was tied up with a band of bulrush fibres. A quiver full of arrows swung on her back.
The furthest one approached the tree throw swiftly. Her outfit was identical to that of her companions. She wore a garland woven from clover and heather on her dull brick-red hair. She was holding a bow not bent but with an arrow nocked.
Ten thesse in meáth aep Eithné llev? she asked coming over. Her voice was extremely melodious and her eyes huge and black. Ess Gwynbleidd?
Aé… aesseá… he began but the words in the Brokilon dialect which sounded like singing in the dryads mouth stuck in his throat and made his lips itchy. Do none of you know the Common Speech? I dont speak your—
An váill. Vort llinge she cut him off.
I am Gwynbleidd. White Wolf. Lady Eithné knows me. I am travelling to her as an envoy. I have been in Brokilon before. In Duén Canell.
Gwynbleidd. The redhead narrowed her eyes. Vattghern?
Yes he confirmed. The Witcher.
The olive-haired one snorted angrily but lowered her bow. The red-haired one looked at him with eyes wide open but her face–smeared with green stripes–was quite motionless expressionless like that of a statue. The immobility meant her face could not be categorised as pretty or ugly. Instead of such classification a thought came to him about indifference and heartlessness not to say cruelty. Geralt reproached himself for that judgement catching himself mistakenly humanising the dryad. He ought to have known after all that she was older than the other two. In spite of appearances she was much much older than them.
They stood in indecisive silence. Geralt heard Frexinet moaning groaning and coughing. The red-haired one must also have heard but her face did not even twitch. The Witcher rested his hands on his hips.
Theres a wounded man over there in the tree hole he said calmly. He will die if he doesnt receive aid.
Tháess aep! the olive-haired one snapped bending her bow and aiming the arrowhead straight at his face.
Will you let him die like a dog? he said not raising his voice. Will you leave him to drown slowly in his own blood? In that case better to put him out of his misery.
Be silent! the dryad barked switching to the Common Speech. But she lowered her bow and released the tension on the bowstring. She looked at the other questioningly. The red-haired one nodded indicating the tree hollow. The olive-haired one ran over quickly and silently.
I want to see Lady Eithné Geralt repeated. Im on a diplomatic mission…
She the red-haired one pointed to the honey-haired one will lead you to Duén Canell. Go.
Frex… And the wounded man?
The dryad looked at him squinting. She was still fiddling with the nocked arrow.
Do not worry she said. Go. She will lead you there.
But…
Vaen vort! She cut him off her lips tightening.
He shrugged and turned towards the one with the hair the colour of honey. She seemed the youngest of the three but he might have been mistaken. He noticed she had blue eyes.
Then let us go.
Yes the honey-coloured haired one said softly. After a short moment of hesitation she handed him his sword. Let us go.
What is your name? he asked. Be silent.
She moved very swiftly through the dense forest not looking back. Geralt had to exert himself to keep up with her. He knew the dryad was doing it deliberately knew that she wanted the man following her to get stuck groaning in the undergrowth or to fall to the ground exhausted incapable of going on. She did not know of course that she was dealing with a witcher not a man. She was too young to know what a witcher was.
The young woman–Geralt now knew she was not a pure-blood dryad–suddenly stopped and turned around. He saw her chest heaving powerfully beneath her short dappled jacket saw that she was having difficulty stopping herself from breathing through her mouth.
Shall we slow down? he suggested with a smile.
Yeá. She looked at him with hostility. Aeén esseáth Sidh?
No Im not an elf. What is your name?
Braenn she answered marching on but now at a slower pace not trying to outdistance him. They walked alongside each other close. He smelled the scent of her sweat the ordinary sweat of a young woman. The sweat of dryads carried the scent of delicate willow leaves crushed in the hands.
And what were you called before?
She glanced at him and suddenly grimaced; he thought she would become annoyed or order him to be silent. She did not.
I dont remember she said reluctantly. He did not think it was true.
She did not look older than sixteen and she could not have been in Brokilon for more than six or seven years. Had she come earlier as a very young child or simply a baby he would not now be able to see the human in her. Blue eyes and naturally fair hair did occur among dryads. Dryad children conceived in ritual mating with elves or humans inherited organic traits exclusively from their mothers and were always girls. Extremely infrequently as a rule in a subsequent generation a child would nonetheless occasionally be born with the eyes or hair of its anonymous male progenitor. But Geralt was certain that Braenn did not have a single drop of dryad blood. And anyway it was not especially important. Blood or not she was now a dryad.
And what she looked askance at him do they call you?
Gwynbleidd.
She nodded.
Then we shall go… Gwynbleidd.
They walked more slowly than before but still briskly. Braenn of course knew Brokilon; had he been alone Geralt would have been unable to maintain the pace or the right direction. Braenn stole through the barricade of dense forest using winding concealed paths clearing gorges running nimbly across fallen trees as though they were bridges confidently splashing through glistening stretches of swamp green from duckweed which the Witcher would not have dared to tread on. He would have lost hours if not days skirting around.
Braenns presence did not only protect him from the savagery of the forest; there were places where the dryad slowed down walking extremely cautiously feeling the path with her foot and holding him by the hand. He knew the reason. Brokilons traps were legendary; people talked about pits full of sharpened stakes about booby-trapped bows about falling trees about the terrible urchin–a spiked ball on a rope which falling suddenly swept the path clear. There were also places where Braenn would stop and whistle melodiously and answering whistles would come from the undergrowth. There were other places where she would stop with her hand on the arrows in her quiver signalling for him to be silent and wait tense until whatever was rustling in the thicket moved away.
In spite of their fast pace they had to stop for the night. Braenn chose an excellent spot; a hill onto which thermal updrafts carried gusts of warm air. They slept on dried bracken very close to one another in dryad custom. In the middle of the night Braenn hugged him close. And nothing more. He hugged her back. And nothing more. She was a dryad. The point was to keep warm.
They set off again at daybreak while it was still almost dark.
They passed through a belt of sparsely forested hills creeping cautiously across small valleys full of mist moving through broad grassy glades and across clearings of wind-felled trees.
Braenn stopped once again and looked around. She had apparently lost her way but Geralt knew that was impossible. Taking advantage of a break in the march however he sat down on a fallen tree.
And then he heard a scream. Shrill. High-pitched. Desperate.
Braenn knelt down in a flash at once drawing two arrows from her quiver. She seized one in her teeth and nocked the other bent her bow taking aim blindly through the bushes towards the sound of the voice.
Dont shoot! he cried.
He leaped over the tree trunk and forced his way through the brush.
A small creature in a short grey jacket was standing in a small clearing at the foot of a rocky cliff with its back pressed against the trunk of a withered hornbeam. Something was moving slowly about five paces in front of it parting the grass. That thing was about twelve feet long and was dark brown. At first Geralt thought it was a snake. But then he noticed the wriggling yellow hooked limbs and flat segments of the long thorax and realised it was not a snake. It was something much more sinister.
The creature hugging the tree cried out shrilly. The immense myriapod raised above the grass long twitching feelers with which it sensed odours and warmth.
Dont move! The Witcher yelled and stamped to attract the scolopendromorphs attention. But the myriapod did not react for its feelers had already caught the scent of the nearer victim. The monster wriggled its limbs coiled itself up like an S and moved forward. Its bright yellow limbs rippled through grass evenly like the oars of a galley.
Yghern! Braenn yelled.
Geralt hurtled into the clearing in two bounds jerking his sword from its scabbard on his back as he ran and in full flight struck the petrified creature beneath the tree with his hip shoving it aside into some brambles. The scolopendromorph rustled the grass wriggled its legs and attacked raising its anterior segments its venom-dripping pincers chattering. Geralt danced leaped over the flat body and slashed it with his sword from a half-turn aiming at a vulnerable spot between the armoured plates on its body.
The monster was too swift however and the sword struck the chitinous shell without cutting through it; the thick carpet of moss absorbed the blow. Geralt dodged but not deftly enough. The scolopendromorph wound the posterior part of its body around his legs with enormous strength. The Witcher fell rolled over and tried to pull himself free. In vain.
The myriapod flexed and turned around to reach him with its pincers and at the same time fiercely dug its claws into the tree and wrapped itself around it. Right then an arrow hissed above Geralts head penetrating the armour with a crack pinning the creature to the trunk. The scolopendromorph writhed broke the arrow and freed itself but was struck at once by two more. The Witcher kicked the thrashing abdomen off and rolled away to the side.
Braenn kneeling was shooting at an astonishing rate sending arrow after arrow into the scolopendromorph. The myriapod was breaking the shafts to free itself but each successive arrow would pin it to the trunk again. The creature snapped its flat shiny dark-red maw and clanged its pincers by the places which had been pierced by the arrows instinctively trying to reach the enemy which was wounding it.
Geralt leaped at it from the side took a big swing and hacked with his sword ending the fight with one blow. The tree acted like an executioners block.
Braenn approached slowly an arrow nocked kicked the body writhing in the grass its limbs thrashing around and spat on it.
Thanks the Witcher said crushing the beasts severed head with blows of his heel.
Eh?
You saved my life.
The dryad looked at him. There was neither understanding nor emotion in her expression.
Yghern she said nudging the writhing body with a boot. It broke my arrows.
You saved my life and that little dryads Geralt repeated. Where the bloody hell is she?
Braenn deftly brushed aside the bramble thicket and plunged an arm among the thorny shoots.
As I thought she said pulling the little creature in the grey jacket from the thicket. See for yourself Gwynbleidd.
It was not a dryad. Neither was it an elf sylph puck or halfling. It was a quite ordinary little human girl. In the centre of Brokilon it was the most extraordinary place to come across an ordinary human little girl.
She had fair mousy hair and huge glaringly green eyes. She could not have been more than ten years old.
Who are you? he asked. How did you get here?
She did not reply. Where have I seen her before? he wondered. Ive seen her before somewhere. Either her or someone very similar to her.
Dont be afraid he said hesitantly.
Im not afraid she mumbled indistinctly. She clearly had a cold.
Let us get out of here Braenn suddenly said looking all around. Where there is one yghern you can usually expect another. And I have few arrows now.
The girl looked at her opened her mouth and wiped it with the back of her hand smearing dust over her face.
Who the hell are you? Geralt asked again leaning forward. What are you doing… in this forest? How did you get here?
The girl lowered her head and sniffed loudly.
Cat got your tongue? Who are you I said? Whats your name?
Ciri she said sniffing.
Geralt turned around. Braenn examining her bow glanced at him.
Listen Braenn…
What?
Is it possible… Is it possible she… has escaped from Duén Canell?
Eh?
Dont play dumb he said annoyed. I know you abduct little girls. And you? What did you fall from the sky into Brokilon? Im asking if its possible…
No the dryad cut him off. I have never seen her before.
Geralt looked at the little girl. Her ashen-grey hair was dishevelled full of pine needles and small leaves but smelled of cleanliness not smoke nor the cowshed nor tallow. Her hands although incredibly dirty were small and delicate without scars or calluses. The boys clothes the jacket with a red hood she had on did not indicate anything but her high boots were made of soft expensive calfskin. No she was certainly not a village child. Frexinet the Witcher suddenly thought. This was the one that Frexinet was looking for. Hed followed her into Brokilon.
Where are you from? Im asking you you scamp.
How dare you talk to me like that! The little girl lifted her head haughtily and stamped her foot. The soft moss completely spoiled the effect.
Ha the Witcher said and smiled. A princess indeed. At least in speech for your appearance is wretched. Youre from Verden arent you? Do you know youre being looked for? Dont worry Ill deliver you home. Listen Braenn…
The moment he looked away the girl turned very quickly on her heel and ran off through the forest across the gentle hillside.
Bloede dungh! the dryad yelled reaching for her quiver. Caemm aere!
The little girl stumbling rushed blindly through the forest crunching over dry branches.
Stop! shouted Geralt. Where are you bloody going!?
Braenn bent her bow in a flash. The arrow hissed venomously describing a flat parabola and the arrowhead thudded into the tree trunk almost brushing the little girls hair. The girl cringed and flattened herself to the ground.
You bloody fool the Witcher hissed hurrying over to the dryad. Braenn deftly drew another arrow from her quiver. You might have killed her!
This is Brokilon she said proudly.
But shes only a child!
What of it?
He looked at the arrows shaft. It had striped fletchings made from a pheasants flight feathers dyed yellow in a decoction of tree bark. He did not say a word. He turned around and went quickly into the forest. The little girl was lying beneath the tree cowering cautiously raising her head and looking at the arrow stuck into the tree. She heard his steps and leaped to her feet but he reached her with a single bound and seized her by the red hood of her jacket. She turned her head and looked at him then at his hand holding her hood. He released her.
Why did you run away?
None of your business she sniffed. Leave me alone you you—
Foolish brat he hissed furiously. This is Brokilon. Wasnt the myriapod enough? You wouldnt last till morning in this forest. Havent you got it yet?
Dont touch me! she yelled. You peasant! I am a princess so youd better be careful!
Youre a foolish imp.
Im a princess!
Princesses dont roam through forests alone. Princesses have clean noses.
Ill have you beheaded! And her too! The girl wiped her nose with her hand and glared at the approaching dryad. Braenn snorted with laughter.
Alright enough of this the Witcher cut her off. Why were you running away Your Highness? And where to? What were you afraid of?
She said nothing and sniffed.
Very well as you wish he winked at the dryad. Were going. If you want to stay alone in the forest thats your choice. But the next time a yghern attacks you dont yell. It doesnt befit a princess. A princess dies without even a squeal having first wiped her snotty nose. Lets go Braenn. Farewell Your Highness.
W… wait.
Aha?
Im coming with you.
We are greatly honoured. Arent we Braenn?
But you wont take me to Kistrin again? Do you swear?
Who is—? he began. Oh dammit. Kistrin. Prince Kistrin? The son of King Ervyll of Verden?
The little girl pouted her little lips sniffed and turned away.
Enough of these trifles said Braenn grimly. Let us march on.
Hold on hold on. The Witcher straightened up and looked down at the dryad. Our plans are changing somewhat my comely archer.
Eh? Braenn said raising her eyebrows.
Lady Eithné can wait. I have to take the little one home. To Verden.
The dryad squinted and reached for her quiver.
Youre not going anywhere. Nor is she.
The Witcher smiled hideously.
Be careful Braenn he said. Im not that pup whose eye you speared with an arrow from the undergrowth. I can look after myself.
Bloede arss! she hissed raising her bow. Youre going to Duén Canell and so is she! Not to Verden!
No. Not to Verden! the mousy-haired girl said throwing herself at the dryad and pressing herself against her slim thigh. Im going with you! And he can go to Verden by himself to silly old Kistrin if he wants!
Braenn did not even look at her did not take her eyes off Geralt. But she lowered her bow.
Ess dungh! she said spitting at his feet. Very well! Then go on your way! Well see how you fare. Youll kiss an arrow before you leave Brokilon.
Shes right thought Geralt. I dont have a chance. Without her I wont get out of Brokilon nor reach Duén Canell. Too bad we shall see. Perhaps Ill manage to persuade Eithné…
Very well Braenn he said placatingly and smiled. Dont be furious fair one. Very well have it your way. We shall all go to Duén Canell. To Lady Eithné.
The dryad muttered something under her breath and unnocked the arrow.
To the road then she said straightening her hairband. We have tarried too long.
Ooow… the little girl yelped as she took a step.
Whats the matter?
Ive done something… To my leg.
Wait Braenn! Come here scamp Ill carry you pick-a-back.
She was warm and smelt like a wet sparrow.
Whats your name princess? Ive forgotten.
Ciri.
And your estates where do they lie if I may ask?
I wont tell she grunted. I wont tell and thats that.
Ill get by. Dont wriggle or sniff right by my ear. What were you doing in Brokilon? Did you get lost? Did you lose your way?
Not a chance! I never get lost.
Dont wriggle. Did you run away from Kistrin? From Nastrog Castle? Before or after the wedding?
How did you know? She sniffed intent.
Im staggeringly intelligent. Why did you run away to Brokilon of all places? Werent there any safer directions?
I couldnt control my stupid horse.
Youre lying princess. Looking at your size the most you could ride is a cat. And a gentle one at that.
I was riding with Marck. Sir Voymirs esquire. But the horse fell in the forest and broke its leg. And we lost our way.
You said that never happens to you.
He got lost not me. It was foggy. And we lost our way.
You got lost thought Geralt. Sir Voymirs poor esquire who had the misfortune to happen upon Braenn and her companions. A young stripling who had probably never known a woman helped the green-eyed scamp escape because hed heard a lot of knightly stories about virgins being forced to marry. He helped her escape to fall to a dryads dyed arrow–one who probably hasnt known a man herself. But already knows how to kill.
I asked you if you bolted from Nastrog Castle before or after the wedding?
I just scarpered and its none of your business she grunted. Grandmamma told me I had to go there and meet him. That Kistrin. Just meet him. But that father of his that big-bellied king…
Ervyll.
… kept on: the wedding the wedding. But I dont want him. That Kistrin. Grandmamma said—
Is Prince Kistrin so revolting?
I dont want him Ciri proudly declared sniffing loudly. Hes fat stupid and his breath smells. Before I went there they showed me a painting but he wasnt fat in the painting. I dont want a husband like that. I dont want a husband at all.
Ciri the Witcher said hesitantly. Kistrin is still a child like you. In a few years he might turn into a handsome young man.
Then they can send me another painting in a few years she snorted. And him too. Because he told me that I was much prettier in the painting they showed him. And he confessed that he loves Alvina a lady-in-waiting and he wants to be a knight. See? He doesnt want me and I dont want him. So what use is a wedding?
Ciri the Witcher muttered hes a prince and youre a princess. Princes and princesses marry like that thats how it is. Thats the custom.
You sound like all the rest. You think that just because Im small you can lie to me.
Im not lying.
Yes you are.
Geralt said nothing. Braenn walking in front of them turned around probably surprised by the silence. She shrugged and set off.
Which way are we going? Ciri asked glumly. I want to know!
Geralt said nothing.
Answer when I ask a question! she said menacingly backing up the order with a loud sniff. Do you know… whos sitting on you?
He didnt react.
Ill bite you in the ear! she yelled.
The Witcher had had enough. He pulled the girl off his back and put her on the ground.
Now listen you brat he said harshly struggling with his belt buckle. In a minute Ill put you across my knee pull down your britches and tan your backside. No one will stop me doing it because this isnt the royal court and Im not your flunkey or servant. Youll soon regret you didnt stay in Nastrog. Youll soon see its better being a princess than a snot-nosed kid who got lost in the forest. Because its true a princess is allowed to act obnoxiously. And no one thrashes a princesss backside with a belt. At most her husband the prince might with his own hand.
Ciri cowered and sniffed a few times. Braenn watched dispassionately leaning against a tree.
Well? the Witcher asked wrapping his belt around his wrist. Are we going to behave with dignity and temperance? If not we shall set about tanning Her Majestys hide. Well? Whats it to be?
The little girl snivelled and sniffed then eagerly nodded.
Are you going to be good princess?
Yes she mumbled.
Gloaming will soon fall the dryad said. Let us make haste Gwynbleidd.
The forest thinned out. They walked through a sandy young forest across moors and through fog-cloaked meadows with herds of red deer grazing. It was growing cooler.
Noble lord… Ciri began after a long long silence.
My name is Geralt. Whats the matter?
Im awffy awffy hungry.
Well stop in a moment. Itll be dark soon.
I cant go on she snivelled. I havent eaten since—
Stop whining. He reached into a saddlebag and took out a piece of fatback a small round of white cheese and two apples. Have that.
Whats that yellow stuff?
Fatback.
I wont eat that she grunted.
Thats fine he said indistinctly stuffing the fatback into his mouth. Eat the cheese. And an apple. Just one.
Why only one.
Dont wriggle. Have both.
Geralt?
Mhm?
Thank you.
Dont mention it. Foodll do you good.
I didnt… Not for that. That too but… You saved me from that centipede… Ugh… I almost died of fright.
You almost died he confirmed seriously. You almost died in an extremely painful and hideous way he thought. But you ought to thank Braenn.
What is she?
A dryad.
An eerie wife?
Yes.
So shes… They kidnap children! Shes kidnapped us? Hey but you arent small. But why does she speak so strangely?
Thats just her way its not important. Whats important is how she shoots. Dont forget to thank her when we stop.
I wont forget she sniffed.
Dont wriggle future Princess of Verden maam.
Im not going to be a princess she muttered.
Very well very well. You wont be a princess. Youll become a hamster and live in a burrow.
No I wont! You dont know anything!
Dont squeak in my ear. And dont forget about the strap!
Im not going to be a princess. Im going to be…
Yes? What?
Its a secret.
Oh yes a secret. Splendid. He raised his head. What is it Braenn?
The dryad had stopped. She shrugged and looked at the sky.
I cannot go on she said softly. Neither can you I warrant with her on your back Gwynbleidd. We shall stop here. It will darken soon.
Ciri?
Mhm? the little girl sniffed and rustled the branches she was lying on.
Arent you cold?
No she sighed. Its warm today. Yesterday… Yesterday I froze awffy oh my how I did.
It is a marvel Braenn said loosening the straps of her long soft boots. A tiny little moppet but she has covered a long stride of forest. And she got past the lookouts through the bog and the thicket. She is robust healthy and stout. Truly she would come in useful. To us.
Geralt glanced quickly at the dryad at her eyes shining in the semi-darkness. Braenn leaned back against a tree removed her hair-band and let her hair down with a shake of her head.
She entered Brokilon she muttered forestalling his comment. She is ours Gwynbleidd. We are marching to Duén Canell.
Lady Eithné will decide he responded tartly. But he knew Braenn was right.
Pity he thought looking at the little girl wriggling on the green bed. Shes such a determined rascal! Where have I seen her before? Never mind. But its a pity. The world is so big and so beautiful. And Brokilon will now be her world until the end of her days. And there may not be many. Perhaps only until the day she falls in the bracken amidst cries and the whistles of arrows fighting in this senseless battle for the forest. On the side of those who will lose. Who have to lose. Sooner or later.
Ciri?
Yes?
Where do your parents live?
I dont have any parents she sniffed. They drowned at sea when I was tiny.
Yes he thought that explains a lot. A princess the child of a deceased royal couple. Who knows if she isnt the third daughter following four sons? A title which in practice means less than that of chamberlain or equerry. A mousy-haired green-eyed thing hanging around the court who ought to be shoved out as quickly as possible and married off. As quickly as possible before she matures and becomes a young woman and brings the threat of scandal misalliance or incest which would not be difficult in a shared castle bedchamber.
Her escape did not surprise the Witcher. He had frequently met princesses–and even queens–roaming around with troupes of wandering players happy to have escaped some decrepit king still desirous of an heir. He had seen princes preferring the uncertain fate of a soldier of fortune to marriage to a lame or pockmarked princess–chosen by their father–whose withered or doubtful virginity was to be the price of an alliance or dynastic coalition.
He lay down beside the little girl and covered her with his jacket.
Sleep he said. Sleep little orphan.
Orphan? Humph! she growled. Im a princess not an orphan. And I have a grandmamma. And my grandmamma is a queen so youd better be careful. When I tell her you wanted to give me the strap my grandmamma will order your head chopped off youll see.
Ghastly! Ciri have mercy!
Not a chance!
But youre a good little girl. And beheading hurts awfully. You wont say anything will you?
I will.
Ciri.
I will I will I will! Afraid are you?
Dreadfully. You know Ciri you can die from having your head cut off.
Are you mocking me?
I wouldnt dream of it.
Shell put you in your place youll see. No one takes liberties with my grandmamma. When she stamps her foot the greatest knights and warriors kneel before her; Ive seen it myself. And if one of them is disobedient then its chop and off with his head.
Dreadful. Ciri?
Uh-huh?
I think theyll cut off your head.
My head?
Naturally. After all your grandmamma the queen arranged a marriage with Kistrin and sent you to Nastrog Castle in Verden. You were disobedient. As soon as you return… itll be chop! and off with your head.
The little girl fell silent. She even stopped fidgeting. He heard her smacking her lips biting her lower lip and sniffing.
Youre wrong she said. Grandmamma wont let anyone chop off my head because… Because shes my grandmamma isnt she? Oh at most Ill get…
Aha Geralt laughed. Theres no taking liberties with grandmamma is there? The switch has come out hasnt it?
Ciri snorted angrily. Do you know what? he said. Well tell your grandmamma that Ive already whipped you and you cant be punished twice for the same crime. Is it a deal?
You must be silly! Ciri raised herself on her elbows making the branches rustle. When grandmamma hears that you thrashed me theyll chop your head off just like that!
So you are worried for my head then?
The little girl fell silent and sniffed again.
Geralt…
What Ciri?
Grandmamma knows I have to go home. I cant be a princess or the wife of that stupid Kistrin. I have to go home and thats that.
You do he thought. Regrettably it doesnt depend on you or on your grandmamma. It depends on the mood of old Eithné. And on my persuasive abilities.
Grandmamma knows Ciri continued. Because I… Geralt promise you wont tell anybody. Its a terrible secret. Dreadful Im serious. Swear.
I swear.
Very well Ill tell you. My mama was a witch so youd better watch your step. And my papa was enchanted too. It was all told to me by one of my nannies and when grandmamma found out about it there was a dreadful to-do. Because Im destined you know?
To do what?
I dont know Ciri said intently. But Im destined. Thats what my nanny said. And grandmamma said she wont let anyone… that the whole ruddy castle will collapse first. Do you understand? And nanny said that nothing nothing at all can help with destiny. Ha! And then nanny wept and grandmamma yelled. Do you see? Im destined. I wont be the wife of that silly Kistrin. Geralt?
Go to sleep he yawned so that his jaw creaked. Go to sleep Ciri.
Tell me a story.
What?
Tell me a story she snorted. How am I supposed to sleep without a story? I mean really!
I dont know any damned stories. Go to sleep.
Youre lying. You do. What no one told you stories when you were little? What are you laughing about?
Nothing. I just recalled something.
Aha! You see. Go on.
What?
Tell me a story.
He laughed again put his hands under his head and looked up at the stars twinkling beyond the branches above their heads.
There was once… a cat he began. An ordinary tabby mouser. And one day that cat went off all by itself on a long journey to a terrible dark forest. He walked… And he walked… And he walked…
Dont think Ciri mumbled cuddling up to him that Ill fall asleep before he gets there.
Keep quiet rascal. So… he walked and he walked until he came across a fox. A red fox.
Braenn sighed and lay down beside the Witcher on the other side and also snuggled up a little.
Very well Ciri sniffed. Say what happened next.
The fox looked at the cat. Who are you? he asked. Im a cat said the cat. Ha said the fox. But arent you afraid cat to be roaming the forest alone? What will you do if the king comes a-hunting? With hounds and mounted hunters and beaters? I tell you cat said the fox the chase is a dreadful hardship to creatures like you and I. You have a pelt I have a pelt and hunters never spare creatures like us because hunters have sweethearts and lovers and their little hands and necks get cold so they make muffs and collars for those strumpets to wear.
What are muffs? Ciri asked.
Dont interrupt. And the fox went on. I cat know how to outwit them; I have one thousand two hundred and eighty-six ways to outfox those hunters so cunning am I. And you cat how many ways do you have?
Oh what a fine tale Ciri said cuddling more tightly to the Witcher. What did the cat say?
Aye whispered Braenn from the other side. What did the cat say?
The Witcher turned his head. The dryads eyes were sparkling her mouth was half-open and she was running her tongue over her lips. He could understand. Little dryads were hungry for tales. Just like little witchers. Because both of them were seldom told bedtime stories. Little dryads fell asleep listening raptly to the wind blowing in the trees. Little witchers fell asleep listening raptly to their aching arms and legs. Our eyes also shone like Braenns when we listened to the tales of Vesemir in Kaer Morhen. But that was long ago… So long ago…
Well Ciri said impatiently. What then?
The cat said: I fox dont have any ways. I only know one thing; up a tree as quick as can be. That ought to be enough oughtnt it? The fox burst out laughing. Hah he said. What a goose you are! Flourish your stripy tail and flee for youll perish if the hunters trap you. And suddenly from nowhere the horns began to sound! And the hunters leaped out from the bushes. And they saw the cat and the fox. And they were upon them!
Oh! Ciri sniffed and the dryad shifted suddenly.
Quiet. And they were upon them yelling: Have them skin them! Well make muffs out of them muffs! And they set the hounds on the fox and the cat. And the cat darted up a tree like every cat does. Right to the very top. But the hounds seized the fox! And before Reynard had time to use any of his cunning ways hed been made into a collar. And the cat meowed from the top of the tree and hissed at the hunters but they couldnt do anything to him because the tree was as high as hell. They stood at the foot of the tree swearing like troopers but they had to go away empty-handed. And then the cat climbed down from the tree and slunk calmly home.
What happened then?
Nothing. Thats the end.
What about the moral? Ciri asked. Tales always have a moral dont they?
Hey? Braenn said hugging Geralt even harder. Whats a moral?
A good story has a moral and a bad one doesnt Ciri sniffed with conviction.
That was a good one the dryad yawned. So it has what it ought to have. You moppet should have scurried up a tree from that yghern like that canny tomcat. Not pondered but scurried up the tree without a thought. And that is all the wisdom in it. To survive. Not to be caught.
The Witcher laughed softly.
Werent there any trees in the castle grounds Ciri? In Nastrog? Instead of coming to Brokilon you could have skinned up a tree and stayed there at the very top until Kistrins desire to wed had waned.
Are you mocking me?
Uh-huh.
Know what? I cant stand you.
Thats dreadful. Ciri youve stabbed me in the very heart.
I know she nodded gravely sniffing and then clung tightly to him.
Sleep well Ciri he muttered breathing in her pleasant sparrow scent. Sleep well. Goodnight Braenn.
Deárme Gwynbleidd.
Above their heads a billion Brokilon branches soughed and hundreds of billions of Brokilon leaves rustled.
The next day they reached the Trees. Braenn knelt down and bent her head. Geralt felt the need to do the same. Ciri heaved a sigh of awe.
The Trees–chiefly oaks yews and hickories–had girths of over a hundred feet some much more. It was impossible to say how high their crowns were. The places where the mighty twisted roots joined the vertical trunks were high above their heads however. They could have walked more quickly as the giants grew slowly and no other vegetation could survive in their shadows; there was only a carpet of decaying leaves.
They could have walked more quickly. But they walked slowly. In silence. With bowed heads. Among the Trees they were small insignificant irrelevant. Unimportant. Even Ciri kept quiet–she did not speak for almost half an hour.
And after an hours walk they passed the belt of Trees and once again plunged deep into ravines and wet beechwood forests.
Ciris cold was troubling her more and more. Geralt did not have a handkerchief and having had enough of her incessant sniffing taught her to clear her nose directly onto the ground. The little girl was delighted by it. Looking at her smirk and shining eyes the Witcher was deeply convinced that she was savouring the thought of showing off her new trick at court during a ceremonial banquet or an audience with a foreign ambassador.
Braenn suddenly stopped and turned around.
Gwynbleidd she said unwinding a green scarf wrapped around her elbow. Come here. I will blindfold you. I must.
I know.
I will lead you. Give me your hand.
No protested Ciri. Ill lead him. May I Braenn?
Very well moppet.
Geralt?
Uh-huh?
What does Gwyn… bleidd mean?
White Wolf. The dryads call me that.
Beware theres a root. Dont trip! Do they call you that because you have white hair?
Yes… Blast!
I said there was a root.
They walked on. Slowly. It was slippery under their feet from fallen leaves. He felt warmth on his face the sunlight shining through the blindfold.
Oh Geralt he heard Ciris voice. How delightful it is here… Pity you cant see. There are so many flowers. And birds. Can you hear them singing? Oh theres so many of them. Heaps. Oh and squirrels. Careful were going to cross a stream over a stone bridge. Dont fall in. Oh so many little fishes! Hundreds. Theyre swimming in the water you know. So many little animals oh my. There cant be so many anywhere else.
There cant he muttered. Nowhere else. This is Brokilon.
What?
Brokilon. The Last Place.
I dont understand.
No one understands. No one wants to understand.
You can take off the blindfold now Gwynbleidd. We have arrived.
Braenn stood up to her knees in a dense carpet of fog.
Duén Canell she said pointing.
Duén Canell the Place of the Oak. The Heart of Brokilon.
Geralt had already been there. Twice. But he had never told anyone about it. No one would have believed him.
A basin enclosed by the crowns of mighty green trees. Bathed in fog and mist rising from the earth the rocks and the hot springs. A basin…
The medallion around his neck vibrated slightly.
A basin bathed in magic. Duén Canell. The Heart of Brokilon.
Braenn lifted her head and adjusted the quiver on her back.
We must go. Give me your little hand moppet.
At first the valley seemed to be lifeless. Deserted. But not for long. A loud modulated whistling rang out and a slender dark-haired dryad dressed like all of them in dappled camouflaged attire slid nimbly down barely perceptible steps of bracket mushrooms winding around the nearest trunk.
Ceád Braenn.
Ceád Sirssa. Van vort meáth Eithné á?
Neén aefder the dark-haired dryad answered sweeping her gaze up and down the Witcher. Ess aen Sidh?
She smiled flashing white teeth. She was incredibly comely even according to human standards. Geralt felt uncertain and foolish aware that the dryad was inspecting him uninhibitedly.
Neén Braenn shook her head. Ess vattghern Gwynbleidd á váen meáth Eithné va ass.
Gwynbleidd? the beautiful dryad said grimacing. Bloede caérme! Aenne caen nwedd vort! Tess foile!
Braenn sniggered.
What is it? the Witcher asked growing angry.
Nothing Braenn sniggered again. Nothing. Let us be moving.
Oh Ciri said in delight. Look at those funny cottages Geralt!
Duén Canell really began deep in the valley; the funny cottages resembling huge bunches of mistletoe in shape clung to the trunks and bows at various heights both low just above the ground and high occasionally very high right beneath the very crowns. Geralt also saw several larger constructions on the ground shelters made of woven branches still covered in leaves. He saw movements in the openings to the shelters but the dryads themselves could barely be made out. There were far fewer than there had been the last time he was there.
Geralt Ciri whispered. Those cottages are living. Theyve got little leaves!
Theyre made of living wood the Witcher nodded. Thats how dryads live thats how they build their houses. No dryad will ever harm a tree by chopping or sawing it. They love trees. However they can make the branches grow to form those dwellings.
How sweet. Id like to have a little house like that on our estate.
Braenn stopped in front of one of the larger shelters.
Enter Gwynbleidd she said. You will wait here for Lady Eithné. Vá fáill moppet.
What?
That was a farewell Ciri. She said goodbye.
Oh. Goodbye Braenn.
They went inside. The interior of the cottage twinkled like a kaleidoscope from the patches of sunlight filtered and diffused through the roof structure.
Geralt!
Frexinet!
Youre alive by the Devil! the wounded man said flashing his teeth raising himself up on a makeshift bed of spruce. He saw Ciri clinging to the Witchers thigh and his eyes widened a flush rushing to his face.
You little beast! he yelled. I almost lost my life thanks to you! Oh youre fortunate I cannot stand for Id tan your hide!
Ciri pouted.
Youre the second person she said wrinkling her nose comically to want to thrash me. Im a little girl and little girls cant be beaten!
Id soon show you… whats allowed and what isnt Frexinet coughed. You little wretch! Ervyll is beside himself… Hes sending out word terrified that your grandmothers army is marching on him. Who will believe that you bolted? Everyone knows what Ervylls like and what his pleasures are. Everyone thinks he… did something to you in his cups and then had you drowned in the fishpond! War with Nilfgaard is looming and because of you the treaty and the alliance with your grandmother have gone up in smoke! See what youve done?
Dont excite yourself the Witcher warned for you might open your wounds. How did you get here so swiftly?
The Devil only knows Ive been lying half-dead most of the time. They poured something revolting down my throat. By force. They held my nose and… What a damned disgrace…
Youre alive thanks to what they poured down your throat. Did they bring you here?
They dragged me here on a sledge. I asked after you but they said nothing. I was certain youd caught an arrow. You vanished so suddenly… But youre hale and hearty not even in fetters and not only that prithee you rescued Princess Cirilla… A pox on it you get by everywhere Geralt and you always fall on your feet.
The Witcher smiled but did not respond. Frexinet hacked turned his head away and spat out saliva tinged pink.
Well he added. And youre sure to be the reason they didnt finish me off. They know you bloody eerie wives. Thats the second time youve got me out of trouble.
Oh come on baron.
Frexinet moaning tried to sit up but abandoned the attempt.
Bollocks to my barony he panted. I was a baron back in Hamm. Now Im something like a governor at Ervylls court in Verden. I mean I was. Even if I get out of this forest somehow theres no place for me in Verden now apart from on the scaffold. This little weasel Cirilla slipped out of my hands and my protection. Do you think the three of us went to Brokilon for the hell of it? No Geralt I was fleeing too and could only count on Ervylls mercy if I brought her back. And then I happened on those accursed eerie wives… If not for you Id have expired in that hollow. Youve rescued me again. Its destiny thats as clear as day.
Youre exaggerating.
Frexinet shook his head.
Its destiny he repeated. It must have been written up there that wed meet again Witcher. That youd save my skin again. Remember people talked about it in Hamm after you lifted that bird curse from me.
Chance Geralt said coldly. Pure chance Frexinet.
What chance? Dammit if it hadnt been for you Id probably still be a cormorant—
You were a cormorant? Ciri cried in excitement. A real cormorant? A bird?
I was the baron grinned. I was cursed by… by a bitch… Damn her… for revenge.
I bet you didnt give her a fur Ciri said wrinkling up her nose. For a you know… muff.
There was another reason Frexinet blushed slightly then glowered angrily at the little girl. But what business is it of yours you tyke!
Ciri looked offended and turned her head away.
Yes Frexinet coughed. Where was I… Aha when I was cursed in Hamm. Were it not for you Geralt I would have remained a cormorant till the end of my days I would be flying around the lake shitting on tree branches deluding myself that the shirt made of nettle fibres stubbornly woven by my dear sister would save me. Dammit when I recall that shirt of hers I feel like kicking somebody. That idiot—
Dont say that the Witcher smiled. She had the best of intentions. She was badly informed thats all. Lots of nonsensical myths circulate about undoing curses. You were lucky anyway Frexinet. She might have ordered you to dive into a barrel of boiling milk. Ive heard of a case like that. Donning a nettle shirt if you think about it isnt very harmful to the health even if it doesnt help much.
Ha perhaps youre right. Perhaps I expect too much of her. Eliza was always stupid from a child she was stupid and lovely as a matter of fact; splendid material for a kings wife.
What is lovely material? Ciri asked. And why for a wife?
Dont interfere you tyke I said. Yes Geralt I was lucky you turned up in Hamm then. And that my brother-in-law king was ready to spend the few ducats you demanded for lifting the spell.
You know Frexinet Geralt said smiling even more broadly that news of the incident spread far and wide?
The true version?
I wouldnt say that. To begin with they gave you ten more brothers.
Oh no! The baron raised himself on an elbow and coughed. And so counting Eliza there were said to be twelve of us? What bloody idiocy! My mama wasnt a rabbit!
Thats not all. It was agreed that cormorants arent romantic enough.
Because they arent! Theres nothing romantic about them! The baron grimaced feeling his chest wrapped in bast and sheets of birch bark. What was I turned into according to the tale?
A swan. I mean swans. There were eleven of you dont forget.
And how is a swan more romantic than a cormorant?
I dont know.
I dont either. But Ill bet that in the story Eliza lifted the curse from me with the help of her gruesome nettle blouse?
You win. How is Eliza?
She has consumption poor thing. She wont last long.
Thats sad.
It is Frexinet agreed dispassionately looking away.
Coming back to the curse… Geralt leaned back against a wall made of woven springy switches. You dont have any recurrences? You dont sprout feathers?
No may the Gods be praised the baron sighed. Everything is in good order. The one thing that I was left with from those times is a taste for fish. There are no better vittles for me Geralt than fish. Occasionally I go down to the fishermen on the jetty early in the morning and before they find me something more refined I gobble down a handful or two of bleak straight from the holding cage a few minnows dace or chub… Its pure bliss not food.
He was a cormorant Ciri said slowly looking at Geralt. And you lifted the curse from him. You can do magic!
I think its obvious Frexinet said that he can. Every witcher can.
Wi… witcher?
Didnt you know he was a witcher? The famous Geralt Riv? True enough how is a little tyke like you to know what a witcher is? Things arent what they used to be. Now there are very few witchers. Youd have a job finding one. Youve probably never seen a witcher before?
Ciri shook her head slowly not taking her eyes off Geralt.
A witcher little tyke is a… Frexinet broke off and paled seeing Braenn entering the cottage. No I dont want it! I wont let you pour any more of it down my throat never never again! Geralt! Tell her—
Calm down.
Braenn did not grace Frexinet with anything more than a fleeting glance. She walked over to Ciri who was squatting beside the Witcher.
Come she said. Come moppet.
Where to? Ciri grimaced. Im not going. I want to be with Geralt.
Go the Witcher managed a smile. You can play with Braenn and the young dryads. Theyll show you Duén Canell…
She didnt blindfold me Ciri said very slowly. She didnt blindfold me while we were walking here. She blindfolded you. So you couldnt find your way back here when you leave. That means…
Geralt looked at Braenn. The dryad shrugged and then hugged the little girl tightly.
That means… Ciris voice suddenly cracked. That means Im not leaving here. Doesnt it?
No one can escape their destiny.
All heads turned at the sound of that voice. Quiet but sonorous hard and decisive. A voice demanding obedience which brooked no argument. Braenn bowed. Geralt went down on one knee.
Lady Eithné.
The ruler of Brokilon was wearing a flowing gauzy light-green gown. Like most dryads she was small and slender but her proudly raised head grave sharp-featured face and resolute mouth made her seem taller and more powerful. Her hair and eyes were the colour of molten silver.
She entered the shelter escorted by two younger dryads armed with bows. Without a word she nodded towards Braenn who immediately took Ciri by the hand and pulled her towards the door bowing her head low. Ciri trod stiffly and clumsily pale and speechless. When they passed Eithné the silver-haired dryad seized her swiftly beneath the chin lifted it and looked long in the girls eyes. Geralt could see that Ciri was trembling.
Go Eithné finally said. Go my child. Fear naught. Nothing is capable of changing your destiny. You are in Brokilon.
Ciri followed Braenn obediently. In the doorway she turned around. The Witcher noticed that her mouth was quivering and her green eyes were misty with tears. He didnt say a word.
He continued to kneel head bowed.
Get up Gwynbleidd. Welcome.
Greetings Eithné Lady of Brokilon.
I have the pleasure to host you in my Forest once again. Although you come here without my knowledge or permission. Entering Brokilon without my knowledge or permission is perilous White Wolf. Even for you.
I come on a mission.
Ah… the dryad smiled slightly. That explains your boldness which I shall not describe using other more blunt words. Geralt the inviolability of envoys is a custom observed by humans. I do not recognise it. I recognise nothing human. This is Brokilon.
Eithné—
Be silent she interrupted without raising her voice. I ordered you to be spared. You will leave Brokilon alive. Not because you are an envoy. For other reasons.
Are you not curious whose envoy I am? Where I come from on whose behalf?
Frankly speaking no. This is Brokilon. You come here from the outside from a world that concerns me not. Why then would I waste time listening to supplications? What could some kind of proposal some kind of ultimatum devised by someone who thinks and feels differently to me mean to me? What could I care what King Venzlav thinks?
Geralt shook his head in astonishment.
How do you know I come from Venzlav?
For it is obvious the dryad said with a smile. Ekkehard is too stupid. Ervyll and Viraxas detest me too much. No other realms border Brokilon.
You know a great deal about what happens beyond Brokilon Eithné.
I know much White Wolf. It is a privilege of my age. Now though if you permit I would like to deal with a confidential matter. That man with the appearance of a bear the dryad stopped smiling and looked at Frexinet. Is he your friend?
We are acquainted. I once removed a curse from him.
The problem is Eithné said coldly that I dont know what to do with him. I cannot after all order him put to death. I have permitted him to recover his health but he represents a threat. He does not look like a fanatic. Thus he must be a scalp-hunter. I know that Ervyll pays for every dryad scalp. I do not recall how much. In any case the price rises as the value of money falls.
You are in error. He is not a scalp-hunter.
Why then did he enter Brokilon?
To seek the girl-child whose care he was entrusted with. He risked his life to find her.
Most foolish Eithné said coldly. Difficult to call it even a risk. He was heading for certain death. The fact that he lives at all he owes entirely to his iron constitution and endurance. As far as the child is concerned it also survived by chance. My girls did not shoot for they thought it was a puck or a leprechaun.
She looked once again at Frexinet and Geralt saw that her mouth had lost its unpleasant hardness.
Very well. Let us celebrate this day in some way.
She walked over to the bed of branches. The two dryads accompanying her also approached. Frexinet blanched and cowered without becoming any smaller.
Eithné looked at him for a while narrowing her eyes a little.
Have you children? she finally asked. I am talking to you blockhead.
Eh?
I trust I express myself clearly.
Im not… Frexinet hemmed and coughed. Im not married.
Your marital status is of little concern to me. What interests me is whether you are capable of mustering anything from your suety loins. By the Great Tree! Have you ever made a woman with child?
Errr… Yes… Yes my lady but—
Eithné waved a hand carelessly and turned towards Geralt.
He shall stay in Brokilon she said until he is fully healed and then a little longer. Afterwards… He may go whither he so wish.
Thank you Eithné the Witcher bowed. And… the little girl? What about her?
Why do you ask? The dryad looked at him with a cold glint in her silver eyes. You know.
She is not an ordinary village child. She is a princess.
That makes no impression on me. Nor makes any difference.
Listen…
Not another word Gwynbleidd.
He fell silent and bit his lip.
What about my petition?
I shall listen to it the dryad sighed. No not out of curiosity. I shall do it for you that you might distinguish yourself before Venzlav and collect the fee he probably promised you for reaching me. But not now now I shall be busy. Come to my Tree this evening.
When she had gone Frexinet raised himself on an elbow groaned coughed and spat on his hand.
What is it all about Geralt? Why am I to stay here? And what did she mean about those children? What have you got me mixed up in eh?
The Witcher sat down.
Youll save your hide Frexinet he said in a weary voice. Youll become one of the few to get out of here alive at least recently. And youll become the father of a little dryad. Several perhaps.
What the…? Am I to be… a stud?
Call it what you will. You have limited choices.
I get it the baron winked and grinned lewdly. Why Ive seen captives working in mines and digging canals. It could be worse… Just as long as my strength suffices. Theres quite a few of them here…
Stop smiling foolishly Geralt grimaced and daydreaming. Dont imagine adoration music wine fans and swarms of adoring dryads. Therell be one perhaps two. And there wont be any adoration. They will treat the entire matter very practically. And you even more so.
Doesnt it give them pleasure? It cant cause them any harm?
Dont be a child. In this respect they dont differ in any way from women. Physically at least.
What do you mean?
It depends on you whether itll be agreeable or disagreeable. But that doesnt change the fact that the only thing that interests her is the result. You are of minor importance. Dont expect any gratitude. Aha and under no circumstances try anything on your own initiative.
My own what?
Should you meet her in the morning the Witcher explained patiently bow but without any damned smirks or winks. For a dryad it is a deadly serious matter. Should she smile or approach you you can talk to her. About trees ideally. If you dont know much about trees then about the weather. But should she pretend not to see you stay well away from her. And stay well away from other dryads and watch your hands. Those matters do not exist to a dryad who is not ready. If you touch her shell stab you because she wont understand your intentions.
Youre familiar Frexinet smiled with their mating habits. Has it ever befallen you?
The Witcher did not reply. Before his eyes was the beautiful slender dryad and her impudent smile. Vattghern bloede caérme. A witcher dammit. Why did you bring him here Braenn? What use is he to us? No benefit from a witcher…
Geralt?
What?
And Princess Cirilla?
Forget about her. Theyll turn her into a dryad. In two or three years shed shoot an arrow in her own brothers eye were he to try to enter Brokilon.
Dammit Frexinet swore scowling. Ervyll will be furious. Geralt? Couldnt I—?
No the Witcher cut him off. Dont even try. You wouldnt get out of Duén Canell alive.
That means the lass is lost.
To you yes.
Eithnés Tree was naturally an oak but it was actually three oaks fused together still green not betraying any signs of age although Geralt reckoned they were at least three hundred years old. The trees were hollow inside and the cavity had the dimensions of a large chamber with a high ceiling narrowing into a cone. The interior was lit by a cresset which did not smoke and it had been modestly–but not crudely–transformed into comfortable living quarters.
Eithné was kneeling inside on something like a fibrous mat. Ciri sat cross-legged before her erect and motionless as though petrified. She had been bathed and cured of her cold and her huge emerald eyes were wide open. The Witcher noticed that her little face now that the dirt and the grimace of a spiteful little devil had vanished from it was quite pretty.
Eithné was combing the little girls long hair slowly and tenderly.
Enter Gwynbleidd. Be seated.
He sat down after first ceremonially going down on one knee.
Are you rested? the dryad asked not looking at him and continuing to comb. When can you embark on your return journey? What would you say to tomorrow morn?
When you give the order he said coldly. O Lady of Brokilon. One word from you will suffice for me to stop vexing you with my presence in Duén Canell.
Geralt Eithné slowly turned her head. Do not misunderstand me. I know and respect you. I know you have never harmed a dryad rusalka sylph or nymph; quite the opposite you have been known to act in their defence to save their lives. But that changes nothing. Too much divides us. We belong to different worlds. I neither want nor am able to make exceptions. For anybody. I shall not ask if you understand for I know it is thus. I ask whether you accept it.
What does it change?
Nothing. But I want to know.
I do he confirmed. But what about her? What about Ciri? She also belongs to another world.
Ciri glanced at him timidly and then upwards at the dryad. Eithné smiled.
But not for long she said.
Eithné please. First think it over.
What for?
Give her to me. Let her return with me. To the world she belongs to.
No White Wolf the dryad plunged the comb into the little girls mousy hair again. I shall not. You of all people ought to understand.
Me?
Yes you. Certain tidings from the world even reach Brokilon. Tidings about a certain witcher who for services rendered occasionally demanded curious vows. You will give me what you do not expect to find at home. You will give me what you already have but about which you do not know. Does that sound familiar? After all for some time you witchers have been trying in this way to direct fate you have been seeking boys designated by fate to be your successors wishing to protect yourself from extinction and oblivion. From nihilism. Why then are you surprised at me? I care for the fate of the dryads. Surely that is just? A young human girl for each dryad killed by humans.
By keeping her here you will arouse hostility and the desire for vengeance Eithné. You will arouse a consuming hatred.
Human hatred is nothing new to me. No Geralt. I shall not give her up. Particularly since she is hale. That has been uncommon recently.
Uncommon?
The dryad fixed her huge silver eyes on him.
They abandon sick little girls with me. Diphtheria scarlet fever croup recently even smallpox. They think we are not immune that the epidemic will annihilate or at least decimate us. We disappoint them Geralt. We have something more than immunity. Brokilon cares for its children.
She fell silent leaning over carefully combing out a lock of Ciris tangled hair using her other hand to help.
May I the Witcher cleared his throat turn to the petition with which King Venzlav has sent me?
Is it not a waste of time? Eithné lifted her head. Why bother? I know perfectly well what King Venzlav wants. For that I do not need prophetic gifts at all. He wants me to give him Brokilon probably as far as the River Vda which I gather he considers–or would like to consider–the natural border between Brugge and Verden. In exchange I presume he is offering me a small and untamed corner of the forest. And probably gives his kingly word and offers kingly protection that that small untamed corner that scrap of forest will belong to me forever and ever and that no one will dare to disturb the dryads there. That the dryads there will be able to live in peace. So what Geralt? Venzlav would like to put an end to the war over Brokilon which has lasted two centuries. And in order to end it the dryads would have to give up what they have been dying in the defence of for two hundred years? Simply hand it over? Give up Brokilon?
Geralt was silent. He had nothing to add. The dryad smiled.
Did the royal proposal run thus Gwynbleidd? Or perhaps it was more blunt saying: Dont put on airs you sylvan monster beast of the wilderness relict of the past but listen to what I King Venzlav want. I want cedar oak and hickory mahogany and golden birch yew for bows and pine for masts because Brokilon is close at hand and otherwise I have to bring wood from beyond the mountains. I want the iron and copper that are beneath the earth. I want the gold that lies on Craag An. I want to fell and saw and dig in the earth without having to listen to the whistling of arrows. And most importantly; I want at last to be a king one to whom everything bows down in his kingdom. I do not wish for some Brokilon in our kingdom for a forest I cannot enter. Such a forest affronts me rouses me to wrath and affords me sleepless nights for I am a man we rule over the world. We may if we wish tolerate a few elves dryads or rusalkas in this world. If they are not too insolent. Submit to my will O Witch of Brokilon. Or perish.
Eithné you admitted yourself that Venzlav is not a fool or a fanatic. You know I am certain that he is a just and peace-loving king. The blood shed here pains and troubles him…
If he stays away from Brokilon not a single drop of blood shall be shed.
You well know… Geralt raised his head. You well know it is not thus. People have been killed in Burnt Stump in Eight-Mile in the Owl Hills. People have been killed in Brugge and on the left bank of the Ribbon. Beyond Brokilon.
The places you have mentioned the dryad responded calmly are Brokilon. I do not recognise human maps or borders.
But the forest was cleared there a hundred summers ago!
What is a hundred summers to Brokilon? Or a hundred winters?
Geralt fell silent.
The dryad put down the comb and stroked Ciris mousy hair.
Agree to Venzlavs proposal Eithné.
The dryad looked at him coldly.
How shall we profit by that? We the children of Brokilon?
With the chance of survival. No Eithné do not interrupt. I know what you would say. I understand your pride in Brokilons sovereignty. Nonetheless the world is changing. Something is ending. Whether you like it or not mans dominion over this world is a fact. Only those who assimilate with humans will survive. The rest will perish. Eithné there are forests where dryads rusalkas and elves live peacefully having come to agreement with humans. We are so close to each other after all. Men can be the fathers of your children. What will you gain through this war you are waging? The potential fathers of your children are perishing from your arrows. And what is the result? How many of Brokilons dryads are pure-blood? How many of them are abducted human girls you have modified? You even have to make use of Frexinet because you have no choice. I seem to see few tiny dryads Eithné. I see only her; a little human girl terrified dulled by narcotics paralysed by fear—
Im not afraid at all! Ciri suddenly cried assuming her little devil face for a moment. And Im not parrotised! So youd better watch your step! Nothing can happen to me here. Be sure! Im not afraid. My grandmamma says that dryads arent evil and my grandmamma is the wisest woman in the world! My grandmamma… My grandmamma says there should be more forests like this one…
She fell silent and lowered her head. Eithné laughed.
A Child of the Elder Blood she said. Yes Geralt. There are still being born Children of the Elder Blood of whom the prophesies speak. And you tell me that something is ending… You worry whether we shall survive—
The scamp was supposed to marry Kistrin of Verden Geralt interrupted. Its a pity it will not be. Kistrin will one day succeed Ervyll and were he influenced by a wife with such views perhaps he would cease raids on Brokilon?
I dont want that Kistrin! the little girl screamed shrilly and something flashed in her green eyes. Kistrin can go and find some gorgeous stupid material! Im not material! I wont be a princess!
Soft Child of the Elder Blood the dryad said hugging Ciri. Dont shout. Of course you will not be a princess—
Of course the Witcher interjected caustically. You Eithné and I well know what she will be. I see it has already been decided. So it goes. What answer should I take to King Venzlav O Lady of Brokilon?
None.
What do you mean none?
None. He will understand. Long ago long long ago before Venzlav was in the world heralds rode up to Brokilons borders. Horns and trumpets blared armour glinted and pennants and standards fluttered. Humble yourself Brokilon! they cried. King Goat Tooth king of Bald Hillock and Marshy Meadow orders you to humble yourself Brokilon! And Brokilons answer was always the same. As you are leaving my Forest Gwynbleidd turn around and listen. In the rustle of the leaves you will hear Brokilons answer. Pass it on to Venzlav and add that he will never hear another while the oaks still stand in Duén Canell. Not while a single tree still grows or a single dryad still lives here.
Geralt was silent.
You say something is ending Eithné slowly went on. Not true. There are things that never end. You talk of survival? I am fighting to survive. Brokilon endures thanks to my fight for trees live longer than men as long as they are protected from your axes. You talk to me of kings and princes. Who are they? Those whom I know are white skeletons lying in the necropolises of Craag An deep in the forest. In marble tombs on piles of yellow metal and shining gems. But Brokilon endures the trees sough above the ruins of palaces their roots break up the marble. Does your Venzlav recall those kings? Do you Gwynbleidd? And if not how can you claim that something is ending? How do you know whose destiny is destruction and whose eternity? What entitles you to speak of destiny? Do you actually know what it is?
No the Witcher agreed I do not. But—
If you know not she interrupted there is no place for any but. You know not. You simply know not.
She was silent touched her forehead with her hand and turned her face away.
When you came here the first time years ago she said you did not know either. And Morénn… My daughter… Geralt Morénn is dead. She fell by the Ribbon defending Brokilon. I did not recognise her when they brought her to me. Her face had been crushed by the hooves of your horses. Destiny? And today you Witcher who could not give Morénn a child bring her–the Child of the Elder Blood–to me. A little girl who knows what destiny is. No it is not knowledge which would suit you knowledge which you could accept. She simply believes. Say it again Ciri repeat what you told me before the Witcher Geralt of Rivia White Wolf entered. That witcher who does not know. Say it again Child of the Elder Blood.
Your Maj… Venerable lady Ciri said in a voice that cracked. Do not keep me here. I cannot… I want to go… home. I want to return home with Geralt. I must go… With him…
Why with him?
For he… is my fate.
Eithné turned away. She was very pale.
What do you say to that Geralt?
He did not reply. Eithné clapped her hands. Braenn entered the oak tree emerging like a ghost from the night outside holding a large silver goblet in both hands. The medallion around the Witchers neck began vibrating rapidly and rhythmically.
What do you say to that? repeated the silver-haired dryad standing up. She does not want to remain in Brokilon! She does not wish to be a dryad! She does not want to replace Morénn she wants to leave walk away from her fate! Is that right Child of the Elder Blood? Is that what you actually want?
Ciri nodded her bowed head. Her shoulders were trembling. The Witcher had had enough.
Why are you bullying the child Eithné? We both know you will soon give her the Water of Brokilon and what she wants will cease to mean anything. Why are you doing this? Why are you doing it in my presence?
I want to show you what destiny is. I want to prove to you that nothing is ending. That everything is only beginning.
No Eithné he said standing up. Im sorry if Im spoiling this display for you but I have no intention of watching it. You have gone too far Lady of Brokilon desirous to stress the chasm dividing us. You the Elder Folk like to say that hatred is alien to you that it is a feeling known only to humans. But it is not true. You know what hatred is and are capable of hating you merely evince it a little differently more wisely and less savagely. But because of that it may be more cruel. I accept your hatred Eithné on behalf of all humankind. I deserve it. I am sorry about Morénn.
The dryad did not respond.
And that is precisely Brokilons answer which I am to communicate to Venzlav of Brugge isnt it? A warning and a challenge? Clear proof of the hatred and Power slumbering among these trees by whose will a human child will soon drink poison which will destroy its memory taking it from the arms of another human child whose psyche and memory have already been annihilated? And that answer is to be carried to Venzlav by a witcher who knows and feels affection for both children? The witcher who is guilty of your daughters death? Very well Eithné let it be in accordance with your will. Venzlav will hear your answer will hear my voice will see my eyes and read everything in them. But I do not have to look on what is to occur here. And I do not want to.
Eithné still said nothing.
Farewell Ciri Geralt knelt down and hugged the little girl. Ciris shoulders were trembling powerfully.
Dont cry. Nothing evil can happen to you here.
Ciri sniffed. The Witcher stood up.
Farewell Braenn he said to the younger dryad. Good health and take care. Survive Braenn; live as long as your tree. Like Brokilon. And one more thing…
Yes Gwynbleidd? Braenn lifted her head and something wet glistened in her eyes.
It is easy to kill with a bow girl. How easy it is to release the bowstring and think it is not I not I it is the arrow. The blood of that boy is not on my hands. The arrow killed him not I. But the arrow does not dream anything in the night. May you dream nothing in the night either blue-eyed dryad. Farewell Braenn.
Mona… Braenn said indistinctly. The goblet she was holding shuddered and the transparent liquid filling it rippled.
What?
Mona! she wailed. I am Mona! Lady Eithné! I—
Enough of this Eithné said sharply. Enough. Control yourself Braenn.
Geralt laughed drily.
There you have your destiny Lady of the Forest. I respect your doggedness and your fight. But I know that soon you will be fighting alone. The last dryad of Brokilon sending dryads–who nonetheless still remember their real names–to their deaths. In spite of everything I wish you fortune Eithné. Farewell.
Geralt… Ciri whispered still sitting motionless with her head lowered. Dont leave me… all by myself…
White Wolf Eithné said embracing the little girls hunched back. Did you have to wait until she asked you? Not to abandon her? To remain with her until the end? Why do you wish to abandon her at this moment? To leave her all alone? Where do you wish to flee to Gwynbleidd? And from what?
Ciris head slumped further down. But she did not cry.
Until the end the Witcher said nodding. Very well Ciri. You will not be alone. I will be with you. Do not fear anything.
Eithné took the goblet from Braenns trembling hands and raised it up.
Can you read Old Runes White Wolf?
Yes I can.
Read what is engraved on the goblet. It is from Craag An. It was drunk from by kings whom no one now remembers.
Duettaeánn aef cirrán Cáerme Gláeddyv. Yn á esseáth.
Do you know what that means?
The Sword of Destiny has two blades… You are one of them.
Stand up Child of the Elder Blood. The dryads voice clanged like steel in an order which could not be defied a will which had to be yielded to. Drink. It is the Water of Brokilon.
Geralt bit his lips and stared at Eithnés silver eyes. He did not look at Ciri who was slowly bringing her lips to the edge of the goblet. He had seen it before once long ago. The convulsions the tremors; the incredible horrifying slowly dwindling cry. And the emptiness torpor and apathy in the slowly opening eyes. He had seen it before.
Ciri drank. A tear rolled slowly down Braenns unmoving face.
That will do Eithné took the goblet away placed it on the ground and stroked the little girls hair which fell onto her shoulders in mousy waves.
O Child of the Elder Blood she said. Choose. Do you wish to remain in Brokilon or do you follow your destiny?
The Witcher shook his head in disbelief. Ciri was flushed and breathing a little more quickly. And nothing else. Nothing.
I wish to follow my destiny she said brightly looking the dryad in the eyes.
Then let it be Eithné said coldly and tersely. Braenn sighed aloud.
I wish to be alone Eithné said turning her back on them. Please leave.
Braenn took hold of Ciri and touched Geralts arm but the Witcher pushed her arm away.
Thank you Eithné he said. The dryad slowly turned to face him.
What are you thanking me for?
For destiny he smiled. For your decision. For that was not the Water of Brokilon was it? It was Ciris destiny to return home. But you Eithné played the role of destiny. And for that I thank you.
How little you know of destiny the dryad said bitterly. How little you know Witcher. How little you see. How little you understand. You thank me? You thank me for the role I have played? For a vulgar spectacle? For a trick a deception a hoax? For the sword of destiny being made as you judge of wood dipped in gold paint? Then go further; do not thank but expose me. Have it your own way. Prove that the arguments are in your favour. Fling your truth in my face show me the triumph of sober human truth thanks to which in your opinion you gain mastery of the world. This is the Water of Brokilon. A little still remains. Dare you? O conqueror of the world?
Geralt although annoyed by her words hesitated but only for a moment. The Water of Brokilon even if it were authentic would have no effect on him. He was completely immune to the toxic hallucinogenic tannins. But there was no way it could have been the Water of Brokilon; Ciri had drunk it and nothing had happened. He reached for the goblet with both hands and looked into the dryads silver eyes.
The ground rushed from under his feet all at once and hurled him on his back. The powerful oak tree whirled around and shook. He fumbled all around himself with his numb arms and opened his eyes with difficulty; it was as though he were throwing off a marble tombstone. He saw above him Braenns tiny face and beyond her Eithnés eyes shining like quicksilver. And other eyes; as green as emeralds. No; brighter. Like spring grass. The medallion around his neck was quivering vibrating.
Gwynbleidd he heard. Watch carefully. No closing your eyes will not help you at all. Look look at your destiny.
Do you remember?
A sudden explosion of light rending a curtain of smoke huge candelabras heavy with candles dripping garlands of wax. Stone walls a steep staircase. Descending the staircase a green-eyed mousy-haired girl in a small circlet with an intricately carved gemstone in a silver-blue gown with a train held up by a page in a short scarlet jacket.
Do you remember?
His own voice speaking… speaking…
I shall return in six years…
A bower warmth the scent of flowers the intense monotonous hum of bees. He alone on his knees giving a rose to a woman with mousy locks spilling from beneath a narrow gold band. Rings set with emeralds–large green cabochons–on the fingers taking the rose from his hand.
Return here the woman said. Return here should you change your mind. Your destiny will be waiting.
I shall never return here he thought. I never… went back there. I never returned to…
Whither?
Mousy hair. Green eyes.
His voice again in the darkness in a gloom in which everything was engulfed. There are only fires fires all the way to the horizon. A cloud of sparks in the purple smoke. Beltane! May Day Eve! Dark violet eyes shining in a pale triangular face veiled by a black rippling shock of curls look out from the clouds of smoke.
Yennefer!
Too little the apparitions thin lips suddenly twist a tear rolls down the pale cheek quickly quicker and quicker like a drop of wax down a candle.
Too little. Something more is needed.
Yennefer!
Nothingness for nothingness the apparition says in Eithnés voice.
The nothingness and void in you conqueror of the world who is unable even to win the woman he loves. Who walks away and flees when his destiny is within reach. The sword of destiny has two blades. You are one of them. But what is the other White Wolf?
There is no destiny his own voice. There is none. None. It does not exist. The only thing that everyone is destined for is death.
That is the truth says the woman with the mousy hair and the mysterious smile. That is the truth Geralt.
The woman is wearing a silvery suit of armour bloody dented and punctured by the points of pikes or halberds. Blood drips in a thin stream from the corner of her mysteriously and hideously smiling mouth.
You sneer at destiny she says still smiling. You sneer at it trifle with it. The sword of destiny has two blades. You are one of them. Is the second… death? But it is we who die die because of you. Death cannot catch up with you so it must settle for us. Death dogs your footsteps White Wolf. But others die. Because of you. Do you remember me?
Ca… Calanthe!
You can save him the voice of Eithné from behind the curtain of smoke. You can save him Child of the Elder Blood. Before he plunges into the nothingness which he has come to love. Into the black forest which has no end.
Eyes as green as spring grass. A touch. Voices crying in chorus incomprehensibly. Faces.
He could no longer see anything. He was plummeting into the chasm into the void into darkness. The last thing he heard was Eithnés voice.
Let it be so.
VII
Geralt! Wake up! Please wake up!
He opened his eyes and saw the sun a golden ducat with distinct edges high up above the treetops beyond the turbid veil of the morning mist. He was lying on damp spongy moss and a hard root was digging into his back.
Ciri was kneeling beside him tugging at his jacket.
Curses… He cleared his throat and looked around. Where am I? How did I end up here?
I dont know she answered. I woke up a moment ago here beside you awffy frozen. I cant remember how… Do you know what? Its magic!
Youre probably right he said sitting up and pulling pine needles from his collar. Youre probably right Ciri. Bloody Water of Brokilon… Looks like the dryads were enjoying themselves at our expense.
He stood up picked up his sword which was lying alongside him and slung the strap across his back.
Ciri?
Uh-huh?
You were also enjoying yourself at my expense.
Me?
Youre the daughter of Pavetta and the granddaughter of Calanthe of Cintra. You knew who I was from the very beginning didnt you?
No she blushed. Not from the beginning. You lifted the curse from my daddy didnt you?
Thats not true he said shaking his head. Your mama did. And your grandmamma. I only helped.
But my nanny said… She said that Im destined. Because Im a Surprise. A Child of Surprise. Geralt?
Ciri he looked at her shaking his head and smiling. Believe me youre the greatest surprise I could have come across.
Ha! The little girls face brightened up. Its true! Im destined. My nanny said a witcher would come who would have white hair and would take me away. But grandmamma yelled… Oh never mind! Tell me where youre taking me.
Back home. To Cintra.
Ah… But I thought you…?
Youll have time to think on the way. Lets go Ciri we must leave Brokilon. It isnt a safe place.
Im not afraid!
But I am.
Grandmamma said that witchers arent afraid of anything.
Grandmamma overstated the facts. Lets go Ciri. If I only knew where we…
He looked up at the sun.
Right lets risk it… Well go this way.
No. Ciri wrinkled her nose and pointed in the opposite direction. That way. Over there.
And how do you know may I ask?
I just know she shrugged and gave him a helpless surprised emerald look. Somehow… Somewhere over there… I dont know…
Pavettas daughter he thought. A Child… A Child of the Elder Blood? She might have inherited something from her mother.
Ciri. He tugged open his shirt and drew out his medallion. Touch this.
Oh she said opening her mouth. What a dreadful wolf. What fangs he has…
Touch it.
Oh my!
The Witcher smiled. He had also felt the sudden vibration of the medallion the sharp wave running through the silver chain.
It moved! Ciri sighed. It moved!
I know. Lets go Ciri. You lead.
Its magic isnt it!
Naturally.
It was as he had expected. The little girl could sense the direction. How he did not know. But soon–sooner than he had expected–they came out onto a track onto a forked three-way junction. It was the border of Brokilon–according to humans at least. Eithné did not recognise it he remembered.
Ciri bit her lip wrinkled her nose and hesitated looking at the junction at the sandy rutted track furrowed by hooves and cartwheels. But Geralt now knew where he was and did not want to depend on her uncertain abilities. He set off along the road heading eastwards towards Brugge. Ciri still frowning was looking back towards the west.
That leads to Nastrog Castle he jibed. Are you missing Kistrin?
The little girl grunted and followed him obediently but looked back several times.
What is it Ciri?
I dont know she whispered. But were going the wrong way Geralt.
Why? Were going to Brugge to King Venzlav who lives in a splendid castle. We shall take baths and sleep on a feather bed…
Its a bad road she said. A bad road.
Thats true Ive seen better. Dont be sniffy Ciri. Lets go. With a will.
They went around an overgrown bend. And it turned out Ciri had been right.
They were suddenly quickly surrounded from all sides. Men in conical helmets chainmail and dark-blue tunics with the gold and black chequered pattern of Verden on their chests. They encircled the pair but none of the men approached or reached for a weapon.
Whence and whither? barked a thickset individual in worn-out green apparel standing before Geralt with bandy legs set wide apart. His face was as swarthy and wrinkled as a prune. A bow and white-fletched arrows protruded behind him high above his head.
Weve come from Burnt Stump the Witcher lied effortlessly squeezing Ciris little hand knowingly. And were going home to Brugge. Whats happening?
Royal service the dark-faced individual said courteously as though he had only then noticed the sword on Geralts back. We…
Bring im ere Junghans! yelled someone standing further down the road. The mercenaries parted.
Dont look Ciri Geralt said quickly. Avert your eyes. Dont look.
A fallen tree lay on the road blocking the way with a tangle of boughs. Long white splinters radiated from the partly-hacked and broken trunk standing in the roadside thicket. A loaded wagon covered with a tarpaulin stood before the tree. Two small shaggy horses stuck with arrows and exposing yellow teeth were lying on the ground caught up in in the shafts and halters. One was still alive and was snorting heavily and kicking.
There were also people lying in dark patches of blood soaked into the sand hanging over the side of the wagon and hunched over the wheels.
Two men slowly emerged from among the armed men gathered around the wagon to be joined by a third. The others–there were around ten of them–stood motionless holding their horses.
What happened? the Witcher asked standing so as to block out Ciris view of the massacre.
A beady-eyed man in a short coat of mail and high boots gave him a searching look and audibly rubbed his bristly chin. He had a worn shiny leather bracer of the kind archers use on his left forearm.
Ambush he said curtly. Eerie wives did for these merchants. Were looking into it.
Eerie wives? Ambushing merchants?
You can see for yourself the beady-eyed man pointed. Stuck with arrows like urchins. On the highway! Theyre becoming more and more impudent those forest hags. You cant just not venture into the forest now you cant even travel the road by the forest.
And you the Witcher asked squinting. Who are you?
Ervylls men. From the Nastrog squads. We were serving under Baron Frexinet. But the baron was lost in Brokilon.
Ciri opened her mouth but Geralt squeezed her hand hard ordering her to stay quiet.
Blood for blood I say! roared the beady-eyed mans companion a giant in a brass-studded kaftan. Blood for blood! You cant let that go. First Frexinet and the kidnapped princess from Cintra and now merchants. By the Gods vengeance vengeance I say! For if not youll see tomorrow or the next day theyll start killing people on their own thresholds!
Bricks right the beady-eyed one said. Isnt he? And you fellow where are you from?
From Brugge the Witcher lied.
And the girl? Your daughter?
Aye Geralt squeezed Ciris hand again.
From Brugge Brick frowned. So Ill tell you fellow that your king Venzlav is emboldening the monstrosities right now. He doesnt want to join forces with Ervyll nor with Viraxas of Kerack. But if we marched on Brokilon from three sides wed finally destroy that scum…
How did the slaughter happen? Geralt asked slowly. Does anybody know? Did any of the merchants survive?
There arent any witnesses the beady-eyed one said. But we know what happened. Junghans a forester can read spoors like a book. Tell him Junghans.
Well said the one with the wrinkled face it were like this: the merchants were travelling along the highway. And their way were blocked. You see sir that fallen pine lying across the road freshly felled. There are tracks in the thicket want to see? Well when the merchants stopped to clear away the tree they were shot just like that. Over there from the bushes by that crooked birch. There are tracks there too. And the arrows mark you all dryad work fletchings stuck on with resin shafts bound with bast…
I see the Witcher interrupted looking at the bodies. Some of them I think survived the arrows and had their throats cut. With knives.
One more man emerged from behind the group of mercenaries standing in front of him. He was skinny and short in an elk-hide kaftan. He had black short hair and his cheeks were blue from closely-shaved black beard growth. One glance at the small narrow hands in short black fingerless gloves at the pale fish-like eyes at his sword and at the hafts of the daggers stuck into his belt and down his left boot was all the Witcher needed. Geralt had seen too many murderers not to recognise one more instantly.
Youve a keen eye said the black-haired man extremely slowly. Indeed you see much.
And well he does said the beady-eyed man. Let him tell his king what he saw. Venzlav still swears eerie wives shouldnt be killed because they are agreeable and good. Ill bet he visits them on May Day and ruts them. Perhaps theyre good for that. Well find out for ourselves if we take one alive.
Or even half-dead Brick cackled. Hi wheres that bloody druid? Almost noon but no sign of him. We must off.
What do you mean to do? Geralt asked without releasing Ciris hand.
What business is it of yours? the black-haired man hissed.
Oh why so sharp right away Levecque? the beady-eyed one asked smiling foully. Were honest men we have no secrets. Ervyll is sending us a druid a great magician who can even talk with trees. Himll guide us into the forest to avenge Frexinet and try and rescue the princess. We arent out for a picnic fellow but on a punitive ex—ex—
Expedition the black-haired man Levecque prompted.
Aye. Took the words out of me mouth. So then go on your way fellow for it may get hot here anon.
Aaaye Levecque drawled looking at Ciri. Twill be dangerous here particularly with a young un. Eerie wives are just desperate for girls like that. Hey little maid? Is your mama at home waiting?
Ciri trembling nodded.
Twould be disastrous the black-haired one continued not taking his eye off her were you not to make it home. She would surely race to King Venzlav and say: You were lax with the dryads king and now you have my daughter and husband on your conscience. Who knows perhaps Venzlav would weigh up an alliance with Ervyll once more?
Leave them Mr Levecque Junghans snarled and his wrinkled face wrinkled up even more. Let them go.
Farewell little maid Levecque said and held out his hand to stroke Ciri on the head. Ciri shuddered and withdrew.
What is it? Are you afraid?
You have blood on your hand the Witcher said softly.
Ah Levecque said raising his hand. Indeed. Its their blood. The merchants. I checked to see if any of them had survived. But alas the eerie wives shoot accurately.
Eerie wives? said Ciri in a trembling voice not reacting to the Witchers squeeze of her hand. Oh noble knights you are mistaken. It could not be dryads!
What are you squeaking about little maid? The pale eyes of the black-haired man narrowed. Geralt glanced to the right and left estimating the distances.
It wasnt dryads sir knight Ciri repeated. Its obvious!
Ay?
I mean that tree… That tree was chopped down! With an axe! But no dryad would ever chop a tree down would they?
Indeed Levecque said and glanced at the beady-eyed man. Oh what a clever little girl you are. Too clever.
The Witcher had already seen his thin gloved hands creeping like a black spider towards the haft of his dagger. Although Levecque had not taken his eyes off Ciri Geralt knew the blow would be aimed at him. He waited for the moment when Levecque touched his weapon while the beady-eyed man held his breath.
Three movements. Just three. His silver-studded forearm slammed into the side of the black-haired mans head. Before he fell the Witcher was standing between Junghans and the beady-eyed man and his sword hissing out of the scabbard whined in the air slashing open the temple of Brick the giant in the brass-studded kaftan.
Run Ciri!
The beady-eyed man who was drawing his sword leaped but was not fast enough. The Witcher slashed him across his chest diagonally downwards and immediately taking advantage of the blows momentum upwards from a kneeling position cutting the mercenary open in a bloody X.
Men! Junghans yelled at the rest who were frozen in astonishment. Over here!
Ciri leaped into a crooked beech tree and scampered like a squirrel up the branches disappearing among the foliage. The forester sent an arrow after her but missed. The remaining men ran over breaking up into a semi-circle pulling out bows and arrows from quivers. Geralt still kneeling put his fingers together and struck with the Aard Sign not at the bowmen for they were too far away but at the sandy road in front of them spraying them in a cloud of sand.
Junghans leaping aside nimbly drew another arrow from his quiver.
No! Levecque yelled springing up from the ground with his sword in his right hand and a dagger in his left. Leave him Junghans!
The Witcher spun around smoothly turning to face him.
Hes mine Levecque said shaking his head and wiping his cheek and mouth with his forearm. Leave him to me!
Geralt crouching started to circle but Levecque did not instead attacking at once leaping forward in two strides.
Hes good the Witcher thought working hard to connect with the killers blade with a short moulinet avoiding the daggers jab with a half-turn. He intentionally did not reply but leaped back counting on Levecque trying to reach him with a long extended thrust and losing his balance. But the killer was no novice. He dropped into a crouch and also moved around in a semi-circle with soft feline steps. He unexpectedly bounded forward swung his sword and whirled shortening the distance. The Witcher did not meet him halfway but restricted himself to a swift high feint which forced the killer to dodge. Levecque stooped over offered a quarte hiding the hand with the dagger behind his back. The Witcher did not attack this time either did not move in but described a semi-circle again skirting around him.
Aha Levecque drawled straightening up. Shall we prolong the game? Why not? You can never have too much amusement!
He leaped spun struck once twice thrice in a rapid rhythm; a cut from above with his sword and immediately from the left with a flat scything blow of his dagger. The Witcher did not disturb the rhythm; parried leaped back and once again circled forcing the killer to move around. Levecque suddenly drew back circling in the opposite direction.
Every game he hissed through clenched teeth must have its end. What would you say to a single blow trickster? A single blow and then well shoot your little brat down from the tree. How about that?
Geralt saw that Levecque was watching his shadow waiting for it to reach his opponent indicating that he had the sun in his eyes. Geralt stopped circling to make the killers job easier.
And narrowed his pupils into vertical slits two narrow lines.
In order to maintain the illusion he screwed his eyes up a little pretending to be blinded.
Levecque leaped spun keeping his balance by extending his dagger hand out sideways and struck with a simply impossible bend of his wrist upwards aiming at the Witchers crotch. Geralt shot forward spun deflected the blow bending his arm and wrist equally impossibly throwing the killer backwards with the momentum of the parry and slashing him across his left cheek with the tip of his blade. Levecque staggered grabbing his face. The Witcher twisted into a half-turn shifted his bodyweight onto his left leg and cleaved open his opponents carotid artery with a short blow. Levecque curled up bleeding profusely dropped to his knees bent over and fell headfirst onto the sand.
Geralt slowly turned towards Junghans. Junghans contorting his wrinkled face in a furious grimace took aim with his bow. The Witcher crouched gripping his sword in both hands. The remaining mercenaries also raised their bows in dead silence.
What are you waiting for? the forester roared. Shoot! Shoot hi— He stumbled staggered tottered forwards and fell on his face with an arrow sticking out of his back. The arrows shaft had striped fletchings made from a pheasants flight feathers dyed yellow in a concoction of tree bark.
The arrows flew with a whistle and hiss in long flat parabolas from the black wall of the forest. They flew apparently slowly and calmly their fletchings sighing and it seemed as though they picked up speed and force as they struck their targets. And they struck unerringly scything down the Nastrog mercenaries knocking them over into the sand inert and mown down like sunflowers hit with a stick.
The ones who survived rushed towards the horses jostling one another. The arrows continued to whistle catching up with them as they ran hitting them as they sat in the saddle. Only three managed to rouse their horses to a gallop and ride off yelling their spurs bloodying their mounts flanks. But not even they got far.
The forest closed up blocking the way. Suddenly the sandy highway bathed in sunlight disappeared. It was now a dense impenetrable wall of black tree trunks.
The mercenaries terrified and stupefied spurred their horses but the arrows flew unceasingly. And hit them knocking them from their saddles among the hoof-falls and neighing of the horses and screams.
And afterwards a silence fell.
The wall of trees blocking the highway shimmered became blurred shone brightly and vanished. The road could be seen again and on it stood a grey horse and on the grey horse sat a rider–mighty with a flaxen fan-shaped beard in a jerkin of sealskin with a tartan woollen sash.
The grey horse turning its head away and champing at the bit moved forward lifting its fore hooves high snorting and becoming agitated by the corpses and the smell of blood. The rider upright in the saddle raised a hand and a sudden gust of wind struck the trees branches.
From the undergrowth on the distant edge of the forest emerged small shapes in tight-fitting garments patched green and brown with faces streaked with walnut-shell dye.
Ceádmil Wedd Brokiloéne! the rider called. Fáill Aná Woedwedd!
Fáill! replied a voice from the forest like a gust of wind.
The green and brown shapes began to disappear one after the other melting into the thicket of the forest. Only one remained with flowing hair the colour of honey. She took several steps and approached.
Vá fáill Gwynbleidd! she called coming even closer.
Farewell Mona the Witcher said. I will not forget you.
Forget me she responded firmly adjusting her quiver on her back. There is no Mona. Mona was a dream. I am Braenn. Braenn of Brokilon!
She waved at him once more. And disappeared.
The Witcher turned around.
Mousesack he said looking at the rider on the grey horse.
Geralt the rider nodded eyeing him up and down coldly. An interesting encounter. But let us begin with the most important things. Where is Ciri?
Here! the girl yelled from the foliage. Can I come down yet?
Yes you may the Witcher said.
But I dont know how!
The same way as you climbed up just the other way around.
Im afraid! Im right at the very top!
Get down I said! We need to have a serious conversation young lady!
What about?
About why the bloody hell you climbed up there instead of running into the forest? I would have followed you instead of… Oh blow it. Get down!
I did what the cat in the story did! Whatever I do its always wrong! Why Id like to know.
I would too the druid said dismounting. I would also like to know. And your grandmamma Queen Calanthe would like to know too. Come on climb down princess.
Leaves and dry branches fell from the tree. Then there was a sharp crack of tearing material and finally Ciri appeared sliding astride the trunk. She had picturesque shreds instead of a hood on her jacket.
Uncle Mousesack!
In person. The druid embraced and cuddled the little girl.
Did grandmamma send you? Uncle? Is she very worried?
Not very Mousesack smiled. She is too busy soaking her switch. The way to Cintra Ciri will take us some time. Devote it to thinking up an explanation for your deeds. It ought to be if you want to benefit from my counsel a very short and matter-of-fact explanation. One which can be given very very quickly. For in any case I judge you will be screaming at the end of it princess. Very very loudly.
Ciri grimaced painfully wrinkled up her nose snorted softly and her hands involuntarily went towards the endangered place.
Lets go Geralt said looking around. Lets go Mousesack.
No the druid said. Calanthe has changed her plans she does not want the marriage of Ciri and Kistrin to go ahead now. She has her reasons. Additionally I presume I dont have to explain that following that dreadful scandal with the sham ambush on the merchants King Ervyll has gone down a long way in my estimation and my estimation matters in the kingdom. No we wont even stop off at Nastrog. Ill take the lass straight to Cintra. Ride with us Geralt.
What for? The Witcher glanced at Ciri who was now slumbering beneath a tree wrapped in Mousesacks jerkin.
You well know what for. That child Geralt is linked to you by destiny. For the third time yes the third your paths have crossed. Metaphorically of course particularly as regards the previous two occasions. You surely cant call it coincidence?
What does it matter what I call it? The Witcher smiled wryly. The essence is not in the name Mousesack. Why ought I to ride to Cintra? I have already been to Cintra; I have already as you described it crossed paths. What of it?
Geralt you demanded a vow from Calanthe then from Pavetta and her husband. The vow has been kept. Ciri is the Child of Destiny. Destiny demands…
That I take the child and turn her into a witcher? A little girl? Take a good look at me Mousesack. Can you imagine me as a comely lass?
To hell with witchering the druid said annoyed. What are you talking about? What has the one to do with the other? No Geralt I see that you understand nothing I shall have to use simple words. Listen any fool including you may demand a vow may exact a promise and will not become remarkable because of it. It is the child who is extraordinary. And the bond which comes into being when the child is born is extraordinary. Need I be more clear? Very well Geralt. From the moment Ciri was born what you wanted and what you planned to do ceased to matter and what you dont want and what you mean to give up doesnt make any difference either. You dont bloody matter! Dont you understand?
Dont shout youll wake her up. Our destiny is asleep. And when she awakes… Mousesack one must occasionally give up… Even the most extraordinary things.
But you know the druid looked at him coldly you will never have a child of your own.
Yes.
And youre still giving her up?
Yes I am. Im surely permitted to arent I?
You are Mousesack said. Indeed. But it is risky. There is an old prophecy saying that the sword of destiny…
… has two blades Geralt completed the sentence. Ive heard it.
Oh do as you think fit the druid turned his head away and spat. Just think I was prepared to stick my neck out for you…
You?
Me. Unlike you I believe in destiny. And I knew that it is hazardous to trifle with a two-edged sword. Dont trifle with it Geralt. Take advantage of the chance which is presenting itself. Turn what connects you to Ciri into the normal healthy bond of a child with its guardian. For if you do not… Then that bond may manifest itself differently. More terribly. In a negative and destructive way. I want to protect you both from that. If you wanted to take her I would not protest. I would take upon myself the risk of explaining why to Calanthe.
How do you know Ciri would want to go with me? Because of some old prophecies?
No Mousesack said gravely. Because she only fell asleep after you cuddled her. Because she mutters your name and searches for your hand in her sleep.
Enough Geralt got up because Im liable to get emotional. Farewell bearded one. My compliments to Calanthe. And think something up… For Ciris sake.
You will not escape Geralt.
From destiny? The Witcher tightened the girth of the captured horse.
No the druid said looking at the sleeping child. From her.
The Witcher nodded and jumped into the saddle. Mousesack sat motionless poking a stick into the dying campfire.
He rode slowly away through heather as high as his stirrups across the hillside leading into the valley towards the black forest.
Geraaalt!
He turned around. Ciri was standing on the brow of the hill a tiny grey figure with windblown mousy hair.
Dont go!
She waved.
Dont go!
She yelled shrilly.
Dont goooo!
I have to he thought. I have to Ciri. Because… I always do.
You wont get away! she cried. Dont go thinking that! You cant run away! Im your destiny do you hear?
There is no destiny he thought. It does not exist. The only thing that everyone is destined for is death. Death is the other blade of the two-edged sword. I am the first blade. And the second is death which dogs my footsteps. I cannot I may not expose you to that Ciri.
I am your destiny!
The words reached his ears from the hilltop more softly more despairingly.
He nudged the horse with his heel and rode straight ahead heading deep into the black cold and boggy forest as though into an abyss into the pleasant familiar shade into the gloom which seemed to have no end.
SOMETHING MORE
When hooves suddenly rapped on the timbers of the bridge Yurga did not even raise his head; he just howled softly released the wheel rim he was grappling with and crawled under the cart as quickly as he could. Flattened scraping his back against the rough manure and mud caked onto the underside of the vehicle he whined and trembled with fear.
The horse moved slowly towards the cart. Yurga saw it place its hooves cautiously on the rotted moss-covered timbers.
Get out the unseen horseman said. Yurgas teeth chattered and he pulled his head into his shoulders. The horse snorted and stamped.
Easy Roach the horseman said. Yurga heard him pat his mount on the neck. Get out from under there fellow. I wont do you any harm.
The merchant did not believe the strangers declaration in the slightest. There was something calming and at the same time intriguing in his voice however though it was by no means a voice which could be described as pleasant. Yurga mumbling prayers to a dozen deities all at once timidly stuck his head out from under the cart.
The horseman had hair as white as milk tied back from his forehead with a leather band and a black woollen cloak falling over the rump of the chestnut mare. He did not look at Yurga. Leaning from his saddle he was examining the cartwheel sunk up to the hub between the bridges broken beams. He suddenly raised his head flicked a gaze over the merchant and observed the undergrowth above the banks of the ravine.
Yurga scrambled out blinked and rubbed his nose with a hand smearing wood tar from the wheel hub over his face. The horseman fixed dark narrowed piercing eyes as sharp as a spear tip on him. Yurga was silent.
The two of us wont be able to pull it out said the stranger finally pointing at the stuck wheel. Were you travelling alone?
There were three of us Yurga stammered. Servants sir. But they fled the scoundrels…
Im not surprised said the horseman looking under the bridge towards the bottom of the ravine. Im not surprised at all. I think you ought to do the same. Time is short.
Yurga did not follow the strangers gaze. He did not want to look at the mass of skulls ribs and shinbones scattered among the rocks peeping out from the burdock and nettles covering the bottom of the dried-up stream. He was afraid that with just one more glance one more glimpse of the black eye sockets grinning teeth and cracked bones something would snap in him the remains of his desperate courage would escape like air from a fishs bladder and he would dash back up the highway stifling a scream just as the carter and his lad had less than an hour before.
What are you waiting for? the horseman asked softly reining his horse around. For nightfall? Itll be too late then. Theyll come for you as soon as it begins to get dark. Or maybe even sooner. Lets go jump up behind me. Lets both get out of here as quick as we can.
But the cart sir? Yurga howled at the top of his voice not knowing if from fear despair or rage. And my goods? Thats a whole years work! Id rather drop dead! Im not leaving it!
I think you still dont know where the bloody hell you are friend the stranger said calmly extending a hand towards the ghastly graveyard beneath the bridge. Wont leave your cart you say? I tell you when darkness falls not even King Dezmods treasury will save you never mind your lousy cart. What the hell came over you to take a shortcut through this wilderness? Dont you know what has infested this place since the war?
Yurga shook his head.
You dont know nodded the stranger. But youve seen whats down there? Itd be difficult not to notice. Thats all the other men who took a shortcut through here. And you say you wont leave your cart. And what I wonder do you have in your cart?
Yurga did not reply but glowered at the horseman trying to choose between oakum and old rags.
The horseman did not seem particularly interested in the answer. He reassured his chestnut who was chewing its bit and tossing its head.
Please sir… the merchant finally muttered. Help me. Save me. My eternal gratitude… Dont leave… Ill give you whatever you want whatever you ask… Save me sir!
The stranger resting both hands on the pommel of his saddle suddenly turned his head towards him.
What did you say?
Yurga opened his mouth but said nothing.
Youll give me whatever I ask for? Say it again.
Yurga smacked his lips closed his mouth and wished he was agile enough to kick himself in the arse. His head was spinning with fantastic theories as to the reward that this weird stranger might demand. Most of them including the privilege of weekly use of his rosy-cheeked young wife did not seem as awful as the prospect of losing the cart and certainly not as macabre as the possibility of ending up at the bottom of the canyon as one more bleached skeleton. His merchants experience forced him into some rapid calculations. The horseman although he did not resemble a typical ruffian tramp or marauder–of which there were plenty on the roads after the war–surely wasnt a magnate or governor either nor one of those proud little knights with a high opinion of themselves who derive pleasure from robbing the shirt off their neighbours backs. Yurga reckoned him at no more than twenty pieces of gold. However his commercial instincts stopped him from naming a price. So he limited himself to mumbling something about lifelong gratitude.
I asked you the stranger calmly reminded him after waiting for the merchant to be quiet if youll give me whatever I ask for?
There was no way out. Yurga swallowed bowed his head and nodded his agreement. The stranger in spite of Yurgas expectations did not laugh portentously; quite the opposite he did not show any sign of being delighted by his victory in the negotiations. Leaning over in the saddle he spat into the ravine.
What am I doing? he said grimly. What the fuck am I doing? Well so be it. Ill try to get you out of this though I dont know that it wont finish disastrously for us both. But if I succeed in exchange you will…
Yurga curled up close to tears.
You will give me the horseman in the black cloak suddenly and quickly recited whatever you come across at home on your return but did not expect. Do you swear?
Yurga groaned and nodded quickly.
Good the stranger grimaced. And now stand aside. It would be best if you got back under the cart. The sun is about to set.
He dismounted and took his cloak from his shoulders. Yurga saw that the stranger was carrying a sword on his back on a belt slung diagonally across his chest. He had a vague sense he had once heard of people with a similar way of carrying a weapon. The black leather hip-length jacket with long sleeves sparkling with silver studs might have indicated that the stranger came from Novigrad or the surroundings but the fashion for such dress had recently become widespread particularly among youngsters. Although this stranger was no youngster.
After removing his saddlebags from his mount the horseman turned around. A round medallion hung on a silver chain around his neck. He was holding a small metal-bound chest and an oblong parcel wrapped in skins and fastened with a strap under one arm.
Arent you under the cart yet? he asked approaching. Yurga saw that a wolfs head with open jaws and armed with fangs was depicted on the medallion. He suddenly recalled.
Would you be… a witcher? Sir?
The stranger shrugged.
You guess right. A witcher. Now move away. To the other side of the cart. Dont come out from there and be silent. I must be alone for a while.
Yurga obeyed. He hunkered down by the wheel wrapped in a mantle. He didnt want to look at what the stranger was doing on the other side of the cart even less at the bones at the bottom of the ravine. So he looked at his boots and at the green star-shaped shoots of moss growing on the bridges rotten timbers.
A witcher.
The sun was setting.
He heard footsteps.
Slowly very slowly the stranger moved out from behind the cart into the centre of the bridge. He had his back to Yurga who saw that the sword on his back was not the sword he had seen earlier. Now it was a splendid weapon; the hilt crossguard and fittings of the scabbard shone like stars. Even in the gathering darkness they reflected light although there was almost none; not even the golden-purple glow which a short while earlier had been hanging over the forest.
Sir—
The stranger turned his head. Yurga barely stifled a scream.
The strangers face was white–white and porous like cheese drained and unwrapped from a cloth. And his eyes… Ye Gods something howled inside Yurga. His eyes…
Behind the cart. Now the stranger rasped. It was not the voice Yurga had heard before. The merchant suddenly felt his full bladder troubling him terribly. The stranger turned and walked further along the bridge.
A witcher.
The horse tied to the carts rack snorted neighed and stamped its hooves dully on the beams.
A mosquito buzzed above Yurgas ear. The merchant did not even move a hand to shoo it away. A second one joined it. Whole clouds of mosquitoes were buzzing in the thicket on the far side of the ravine. Buzzing.
And howling.
Yurga clenching his teeth till they hurt realised they were not mosquitoes.
From the thickening darkness on the overgrown side of the ravine emerged some small misshapen forms–less than four feet tall horribly gaunt like skeletons. They stepped onto the bridge with a peculiar heron-like gait feet high making staccato jerky movements as they lifted their bony knees. Their eyes beneath flat dirty foreheads shone yellow and pointed little fangs gleamed white in wide frog-like maws. They came closer hissing.
The stranger as still as a statue in the centre of the bridge suddenly raised his right hand making a bizarre shape with his fingers. The monstrous little beasts retreated hissing loudly before once again moving forwards quickly quicker and quicker on their long spindly taloned forefeet.
Claws scraped on the timbers to the left as another monster jumped out from under the bridge and the remaining ones on the bank rushed forwards in bewildering leaps. The stranger spun around on the spot and the sword which had suddenly appeared in his hand flashed. The head of the creature scrambling onto the bridge flew two yards up into the air trailing a ribbon of blood behind it. Then the white-haired man fell on a group of them and whirled slashing swiftly all around him. The monsters flailing their arms and wailing attacked him from all sides ignoring the luminous blade cutting them like a razor. Yurga cowered hugging the cart.
Something fell right at his feet bespattering him with gore. It was a long bony hand four-clawed and scaly like a chickens foot.
The merchant screamed.
He sensed something flitting past him. He cowered intending to dive under the cart just as something landed on his neck and a scaly hand seized him by the temple and cheek. He covered his eyes howling and jerking his head leaped to his feet and staggered into the middle of the bridge stumbling over the corpses sprawled across the timbers. A battle was raging there–but Yurga could not see anything apart from a furious swarm a mass within which the silver blade kept flashing.
Help meeeee! he howled feeling the sharp fangs penetrating the felt of his hood and digging into the back of his head.
Duck!
He pressed his chin down onto his chest looking out for the flash of the blade. It whined in the air and grazed his hood. Yurga heard a hideous wet crunching sound and then a hot liquid gushed down his back. He fell to his knees dragged down by the now inert weight hanging from his neck.
He watched as three more monsters scuttled out from under the bridge. Leaping like bizarre grasshoppers they latched onto the strangers thighs. One of them slashed with a short blow across its toadlike muzzle took a few steps upright and fell onto the timbers. Another struck with the very tip of the sword collapsed in squirming convulsions. The remaining ones swarmed like ants over the white-haired man pushing him towards the edge of the bridge. One flew out of the swarm bent backwards spurting blood quivering and howling and right then the entire seething mass staggered over the edge and plummeted into the ravine. Yurga fell to the ground covering his head with his hands.
From below the bridge he heard the monsters triumphant squeals suddenly transforming into howls of pain those howls silenced by the whistling of the blade. Then from the darkness came the rattle of stones and the crunch of skeletons being trodden on and crushed and then once again came the whistle of a falling sword and a despairing bloodcurdling shriek which suddenly broke off.
And then there was only silence interrupted by the sudden cry of a terrified bird deep in the forest among the towering trees. And then the bird fell silent too.
Yurga swallowed raised his head and stood up with difficulty. It was still quiet; not even the leaves rustled the entire forest seemed to be dumbstruck with terror. Ragged clouds obscured the sky.
Hey…
He turned around involuntarily protecting himself with raised arms. The Witcher stood before him motionless black with the shining sword in his lowered hand. Yurga noticed he was standing somehow crookedly leaning over to one side.
Whats the matter sir?
The Witcher did not reply. He took a step clumsily and heavily limping on his left leg. He held out a hand and grasped the cart. Yurga saw blood black and shining dripping onto the timbers.
Youre wounded sir!
The Witcher did not reply. Looking straight into the merchants eyes he fell against the carts box and slowly collapsed onto the bridge.
Careful easy does it… Under his head… One of you support his head!
Here here onto the cart!
Ye Gods hell bleed to death… Mr Yurga the bloods seeping through the dressing—
Quiet! Drive on Pokvit make haste! Wrap him in a sheepskin Vell cant you see how he shivers?
Shall I pour some vodka down his throat?
Cant you see hes unconscious? You astonish me Vell. But give me that vodka I need a drink… You dogs you scoundrels you rotten cowards! Scarpering like that and leaving me all alone!
Mr Yurga! He said something!
What? Whats he saying?
Err cant make it out… seems to be a name…
What name?
Yennefer…
Where am I?
Lie still sir dont move or everything will tear open again. Those vile creatures bit your thigh down to the bone youve lost a deal of blood… Dont you know me? Its Yurga! You saved me on the bridge do you recall?
Aha…
Do you have a thirst?
A hell of one…
Drink sir drink. Youre burning with fever.
Yurga… Where are we?
Were riding in my cart. Dont say anything sir dont move. We had to venture out of the forest towards human settlements. We must find someone with healing powers. What weve wrapped round your leg may be insufficient. The blood wont stop coming—
Yurga…
Yes sir?
In my chest… A flacon… With green sealing wax. Strip off the seal and give it to me… In a bowl. Wash the bowl well dont let a soul touch the flacon… If you value your life… Swiftly Yurga. Dammit how this cart shakes… The flacon Yurga…
I have it… Drink sir.
Thanks… Now pay attention. Ill soon fall asleep. Ill thrash around and rave then lie as though dead. Its nothing dont be afeared…
Lie still sir or the wound will open and youll lose blood.
He fell back onto the skins turned his head and felt the merchant drape him in a sheepskin and a blanket stinking of horse sweat. The cart shook and with each jolt pangs of fierce pain shot through his thigh and hip. Geralt clenched his teeth. He saw above him
billions of stars. So close it seemed he could reach out and touch them. Right above his head just above the treetops.
As he walked he picked his way in order to stay away from the light away from the glow of bonfires in order to remain within the compass of rippling shadow. It was not easy–pyres of fir logs were burning all around sending into the sky a red glow shot with the flashes of sparks marking the darkness with brighter pennants of smoke crackling exploding in a blaze among the figures dancing all around.
Geralt stopped to let through a frenzied procession boisterous and wild which was barring his way and lurching towards him. Someone tugged him by the arm trying to shove into his hand a wooden beer mug dripping with foam. He declined and gently but firmly pushed away the man who was staggering and splashing beer all around from the small cask he was carrying under one arm. Geralt did not want to drink.
Not on a night like this.
Close by–on a frame of birch poles towering above a huge fire–the fair-haired May King dressed in a wreath and coarse britches was kissing the red-haired May Queen groping her breasts through her thin sweat-soaked blouse. The monarch was more than a little drunk and tottered trying to keep his balance as he hugged the queen pressing a fist clamped onto a mug of beer against her back. The queen also far from sober wearing a wreath which had slipped down over her eyes hung on the kings neck and leaned close against him in anticipation. The throng was dancing beneath the frame singing yelling and shaking poles festooned with garlands of foliage and blossom.
Beltane! screamed a short young woman right in Geralts ear. Pulling him by the sleeve she forced him to turn around among the procession encircling them. She cavorted by him fluttering her skirt and shaking her hair which was full of flowers. He let her spin him in the dance and whirled around nimbly avoiding the other couples.
Beltane! May Day Eve!
Besides them there was a struggle a squealing and the nervous laugh of another young woman feigning a fight and resistance being carried off by a young man into the darkness beyond the circle of light. The procession hooting snaked between the burning pyres. Someone stumbled and fell breaking the chain of hands rending the procession apart into smaller groups.
The young woman looking at Geralt from under the leaves decorating her brow came closer and pressed herself urgently against him encircling him with her arms and panting. He grabbed her more roughly than he had intended and felt the hot dampness of her body perceptible on his hands through the thin linen pressing against her back. She raised her head. Her eyes were closed and her teeth flashed from beneath her raised twisted upper lip. She smelled of sweat and sweet grass smoke and lust.
Why not? he thought crumpling her dress and kneading her back with his hands enjoying the damp steaming warmth on his fingers. The woman was not his type. She was too small and too plump–under his hand he felt the line where the too-tight bodice of her dress was cutting into her body dividing her back into two distinctly perceptible curves where he should not have been able to feel them. Why not? he thought on a night like this after all… It means nothing.
Beltane… Fires as far as the horizon. Beltane May Day Eve.
The nearest pyre devoured the dry outstretched pine branches being thrown onto it with a crack erupted in a golden flash lighting everything up. The young womans eyes opened wide looking up into his face. He heard her suck air in felt her tense up and violently push her hands against his chest. He released her at once. She hesitated. Tilted her trunk away to the length of her almost straightened arms but she did not peel her hips away from his thighs. She lowered her head then withdrew her hands and drew away looking to the side.
They stood motionless for a moment until the returning procession barged into them shook and jostled them again. The young woman quickly turned and fled clumsily trying to join the dancers. She looked back. Just once.
Beltane…
What am I doing here?
A star shone in the dark sparkling drawing his gaze. The medallion around the Witchers neck vibrated. Geralt involuntarily dilated his pupils his vision effortlessly penetrating the obscurity.
She was not a peasant woman. Peasant women did not wear black velvet cloaks. Peasant women–carried or dragged into the bushes by men–screamed giggled squirmed and tensed their bodies like trout being pulled out of the water. None of them gave the impression that it was they who were leading their tall fair-haired swains with gaping shirts into the gloom.
Peasant women never wore velvet ribbons or diamond-encrusted stars of obsidian around their necks.
Yennefer.
Wide-open violet eyes blazing in a pale triangular face.
Geralt…
She released the hand of the fair-haired cherub whose breast was shiny as a sheet of copper with sweat. The lad staggered tottered fell to his knees rolled his head looked around and blinked. He stood up slowly glanced at them uncomprehending and embarrassed and then lurched off towards the bonfires. The sorceress did not even glance at him. She looked intently at the Witcher and her hand tightly clenched the edge of her cloak.
Nice to see you he said easily. He immediately sensed the tension which had formed between them falling away.
Indeed she smiled. He seemed to detect something affected in the smile but he could not be certain. Quite a pleasant surprise I dont deny. What are you doing here Geralt? Oh… Excuse me forgive my indiscretion. Of course were doing the same thing. Its Beltane after all. Only you caught me so to speak in flagrante delicto.
I interrupted you.
Ill survive she laughed. The night is young. Ill enchant another if the fancy takes me.
Pity Im unable to do that he said trying hard to affect indifference. A moment ago a girl saw my eyes in the light and fled.
At dawn she said smiling more and more falsely when they really let themselves go they wont pay any attention. Youll find another just you wait…
Yen— The rest of the words stuck in his throat. They looked at one another for a long long time and the red reflection of fire flickered on their faces. Yennefer suddenly sighed veiling her eyes with her eyelashes.
Geralt no. Dont lets start—
Its Beltane he interrupted. Have you forgotten?
She moved slowly closer placed her hands on his arms and slowly and cautiously snuggled against him touching his chest with her forehead. He stroked her raven-black hair strewn in locks coiled like snakes.
Believe me she whispered lifting her head. I wouldnt think twice if it were only to be… But its senseless. Everything will start again and finish like last time. It would be senseless if we were to—
Does everything have to make sense? Its Beltane.
Beltane she turned her head. What of it? Something drew us to these bonfires to these people enjoying themselves. We meant to dance abandon ourselves get a little intoxicated and take advantage of the annual loosening of morals which is inextricably linked to the celebration of the endless natural cycle. And prithee we run right into each other after… How long has passed since… A year?
One year two months and eighteen days.
How touching. Was that deliberate?
It was. Yen—
Geralt she interrupted suddenly moving away and tossing her head. Let me make things perfectly clear. I dont want to.
He nodded to indicate that was sufficiently clear.
Yennefer threw her cloak back over one shoulder. Beneath her cloak she had on a very thin white blouse and a black skirt girdled with a belt of silver links.
I dont want she repeated to start again. And the thought of doing with you… what I meant to do with that young blond boy… According to the same rules… The thought Geralt seems to me somewhat improper. An affront to both of us. Do you understand?
He nodded once more. She looked at him from beneath lowered eyelashes.
Will you go?
No.
She was silent for a moment fidgeting nervously.
Are you angry?
No.
Right come on lets sit down somewhere away from this hubbub lets talk for a while. Because as you can see Im glad weve met. Truly. Lets sit together for a while. Alright?
Let us Yen.
They headed off into the gloom far onto the moors towards the black wall of trees avoiding couples locked in embraces. They had to go a long way in order to find a secluded spot. A dry hilltop marked by a juniper bush as slender as a cypress.
The sorceress unfastened the brooch from her cloak shook it out and spread it on the ground. He sat down beside her. He wanted to embrace her very much but contrariness stopped him. Yennefer tidied up her deeply unbuttoned blouse looked at him penetratingly sighed and embraced him. He might have expected it. She had to make an effort to read his mind but sensed his intentions involuntarily.
They said nothing.
Oh dammit she suddenly said pulling away. She raised her hand and cried out a spell. Red and green spheres flew above their heads breaking up high in the air forming colourful fluffy flowers. Laughter and joyous cries drifted up from the bonfires.
Beltane… she said bitterly. May Day Eve… The cycle repeats. Let them enjoy themselves… if they can.
There were other sorcerers in the vicinity. In the distance three orange lightning bolts shot into the sky and away over by the forest a veritable geyser of rainbow-coloured whirling meteors exploded. The people by the bonfires gave awe-struck gasps and cried out. Geralt tense stroked Yennefers curls and breathed in the scent of lilac and gooseberry they gave off. If I desire her too intensely he thought shell sense it and shell be put off. Her hackles will rise shell bristle and spurn me. Ill ask her calmly how shes doing…
Nothing to report she said and something in her voice quavered. Nothing worth mentioning.
Dont do that to me Yen. Dont read me. It unsettles me.
Forgive me. Its automatic. And whats new with you Geralt?
Nothing. Nothing worth mentioning.
They said nothing.
Beltane! she suddenly snapped and he felt the arm she was pressing against his chest stiffen and tauten. Theyre enjoying themselves. Theyre celebrating the eternal cycle of nature regenerating itself. And us? What are we doing here? We relicts doomed to obliteration to extinction and oblivion? Nature is born again the cycle repeats itself. But not for us Geralt. We cannot reproduce ourselves. We were deprived of that potential. We were given the ability to do extraordinary things with nature occasionally literally against her. And at the same time what is most natural and simple in nature was taken from us. What if we live longer than them? After our winter will come the spring and we shall not be reborn; what finishes will finish along with us. But both you and I are drawn to those bonfires though our presence here is a wicked blasphemous mockery of this world.
He was silent. He didnt like it when she fell into a mood like this the origin of which he knew only too well. Once again he thought once again its beginning to torment her. There was a time when it seemed she had forgotten that she had become reconciled to it like the others. He embraced her hugged her rocked her very gently like a child. She let him. It didnt surprise him. He knew she needed it.
You know Geralt she suddenly said now composed. I miss your silence the most.
He touched her hair and ear with his mouth. I desire you Yen he thought I desire you but you know that. You know that dont you Yen?
Yes I do she whispered.
Yen…
She sighed again.
Just today she said looking at him with eyes wide open. Just this night which will soon slip away. Let it be our Beltane. We shall part in the morning. Dont expect any more; I cannot I could not… Forgive me. If I have hurt you kiss me and go away.
If I kiss you I wont go away.
I was counting on that.
She tilted her head. He touched her parted lips with his own. Tentatively. First the upper then the lower. He entwined his fingers in her winding locks touched her ear her diamond earring her neck. Yennefer returning the kiss clung to him and her nimble fingers quickly and surely unfastened the buckles of his jacket.
She fell back onto her cloak spread out on the soft moss. He pressed his mouth to her breast and felt the nipple harden and press against the very fine stuff of her blouse. She was breathing shallowly.
Yen…
Dont say anything… Please…
The touch of her naked smooth cool skin electrified his fingers and his palms. A shiver down his back being pricked by her finger-nails. From the bonfires screams singing a whistle; a far distant cloud of sparks in purple smoke. Caresses and touches. He touching her. She touching him. A shiver. And impatience. The gliding skin of her slim thighs gripping his hips drawing closed like a clasp.
Beltane!
Breathing riven into gasps. Flashes beneath their eyelids the scent of lilac and gooseberry. The May Queen and May King? A blasphemous mockery? Oblivion?
Beltane! May Day Eve!
A moan. Hers? His? Black curls on his eyes on his mouth. Intertwined fingers quivering hands. A cry. Hers? Black eyelashes. A moan. His?
Silence. All eternity in the silence.
Beltane… Fires all the way to the horizon…
Yen?
Oh Geralt…
Yen… Are you weeping?
No!
Yen…
I promised myself… I promised…
Dont say anything. Theres no need. Arent you cold?
Yes I am.
And now?
Now Im warmer.
The sky grew lighter at an alarming rate the contours of the black wall of trees becoming more prominent the distinct serrated line of the treetops emerging from the shapeless gloom. The blue foretoken of dawn creeping up from behind it spread along the horizon extinguishing the lamps of the stars. It had grown cooler. He hugged her more tightly and covered her with his cloak.
Geralt?
Mhm?
Itll soon be dawn.
I know.
Have I hurt you?
A little.
Will it begin again?
It never ended.
Please… You make me feel…
Dont say anything. Everything is all right.
The smell of smoke creeping among the heather. The scent of lilac and gooseberry.
Geralt?
Yes?
Do you remember when we met in the Owl Mountains? And that golden dragon… What was he called?
Three Jackdaws. Yes I do.
He told us…
I remember Yen.
She kissed him where the neck becomes the collarbone and then nuzzled her head in tickling him with her hair.
Were made for each other she whispered. Perhaps were destined for each other? But nothing will come of it. Its a pity but when dawn breaks we shall part. It cannot be any other way. We have to part so as not to hurt one another. We two destined for each other. Created for each other. Pity. The one or ones who created us for each other ought to have made more of an effort. Destiny alone is insufficient its too little. Something more is needed. Forgive me. I had to tell you.
I know.
I knew it was senseless for us to make love.
Youre wrong. It wasnt. In spite of everything.
Ride to Cintra Geralt.
What?
Ride to Cintra. Ride there and this time dont give up. Dont do what you did then… When you were there…
How did you know?
I know everything about you. Have you forgotten? Ride to Cintra go there as fast as you can. Fell times are approaching Geralt. Very fell. You cannot be late…
Yen…
Please dont say anything.
It was cooler. Cooler and cooler. And lighter and lighter.
Dont go yet. Lets wait until the dawn…
Yes lets.
Dont move sir. I must change your dressing. The wound is getting messy and your leg is swelling something terrible. Ye Gods it looks hideous… We must find a doctor as fast as we can…
Fuck the doctor the Witcher groaned. Hand me the chest Yurga. Yes that flacon there… Pour it straight onto the wound. Oh bloody hell! Its nothing nothing keep pouring… Oooow! Right. Bandage it up well and cover me…
Its swollen sir the whole thigh. And youre burning with fever—
Fuck the fever. Yurga?
Yes sir?
I forgot to thank you…
Its not you who should be doing the thanking sir but me. You saved my life you suffered an injury in my defence. And me? What did I do? I bandaged a wounded man whod fainted away and put him on my cart and didnt leave him to expire. Its an ordinary matter Witcher sir.
Its not so ordinary Yurga. Ive been left… in similar situations… Like a dog…
The merchant lowering his head said nothing.
Well what can I say its a base world he finally muttered. But thats no reason for us all to become despicable. What we need is kindness. My father taught me that and I teach it to my sons.
The Witcher was silent and observed the branches of the trees above the road sliding past as the cart went on. His thigh throbbed. He felt no pain.
Where are we?
Weve forded the River Trava now were in the Groundcherry Forests. Its no longer Temeria but Sodden. You were asleep when we crossed the border when the customs officers were rummaging in the cart. Ill tell you though they were astonished by you. But their senior officer knew you and ordered us through without delay.
He knew me?
Aye theres no doubt. He called you Geralt. Thats what he said; Geralt of Rivia. Is that your name?
It is…
And he promised to send a man ahead with the tidings that a doctor is needed. And I gave him a little something so as he wouldnt forget.
Thank you Yurga.
No Witcher sir. Ive already said its me as thanks you. And not just that. Im also in your debt. We have an agreement… What is it sir? Are you feeling faint?
Yurga… The flacon with the green seal…
Sir… Youll start… You were calling out dreadfully in your sleep…
I must Yurga…
As you wish. Wait Ill pour it into a bowl right away… By the Gods we need a doctor as quickly as possible otherwise…
The Witcher turned his head away. He heard
the cries of children playing in a dried-up inner moat surrounding the castle grounds. There were around ten of them. The youngsters were making an ear-splitting din outshouting each other in shrill excited voices which kept breaking into falsetto. They were running to and fro along the bottom of the moat like a shoal of swift little fishes unexpectedly and very quickly changing direction but always staying together. As usual behind the screeching older boys as skinny as scarecrows ran a little child panting and quite incapable of catching up.
There are plenty of them the Witcher observed.
Mousesack smiled sourly tugging at his beard and shrugged.
Aye plenty.
And which of them… Which of these boys is the celebrated Child of Destiny?
The druid looked away.
I am forbidden Geralt…
Calanthe?
Of course. You cannot have deluded yourself that she would give the child up so easily? You have met her after all. She is a woman of iron. I shall tell you something something I ought not to say in the hope that youll understand. I hope too that you will not betray me before her.
Speak.
When the child was born six years ago she summoned me and ordered me to cheat you. And kill it.
You refused.
No one refuses Calanthe Mousesack said looking him straight in the eyes. I was prepared to take to the road when she summoned me once again. She retracted the order without a word of explanation. Be cautious when you talk to her.
I shall. Mousesack tell me what happened to Duny and Pavetta?
They were sailing from Skellige to Cintra. They were surprised by a storm. Not a single splinter was found of the ship. Geralt… That the child was not with them then is an incredibly queer matter. Inexplicable. They were meant to take it with them but at the last moment did not. No one knows why Pavetta could never be parted from—
How did Calanthe bear it?
What do you think?
Of course.
Shrieking like a band of goblins the boys hurtled upwards and flashed beside them. Geralt noticed that not far behind the head of the rushing herd hurried a little girl as thin and clamorous as the boys only with a fair plait waving behind her. Howling wildly the band spilled down the moats steep slope again. At least half of them including the girl slid down on their behinds. The smallest one still unable to keep up fell over rolled down to the bottom and began crying loudly clutching a grazed knee. The other boys surrounded him jeering and mocking and then ran on. The little girl knelt by the little boy hugged him and wiped away his tears smudging dust and dirt over his face.
Let us go Geralt. The queen awaits.
Lets go Mousesack.
Calanthe was sitting on a large bench suspended on chains from the bough of a huge linden tree. She appeared to be dozing but that was belied by an occasional push of her foot to swing the bench every now and again. There were three young women with her. One of them was sitting on the grass beside the swing her spread-out dress shining bright white against the green like a patch of snow. The other two were not far away chatting as they cautiously pulled apart the branches on some raspberry bushes.
Maam Mousesack bowed.
The queen raised her head. Geralt went down on one knee.
Witcher she said drily.
As in the past she was decorated with emeralds which matched her green dress. And the colour of her eyes. As in the past she was wearing a narrow gold band on her mousy hair. But her hands which he remembered as white and slender were less slender now. She had gained weight.
Greetings Calanthe of Cintra.
Welcome Geralt of Rivia. Rise. Ive been waiting for you. Mousesack my friend escort the young ladies back to the castle.
At your behest Your Majesty.
They were left alone.
Six years began Calanthe unsmilingly. You are horrifyingly punctual Witcher.
He did not comment.
There were moments–what am I saying–years when I convinced myself that you would forget. Or that other reasons would prevent you from coming. No I did not in principle wish misfortune on you but I had to take into consideration the none-too-safe nature of your profession. They say that death dogs your footsteps Geralt of Rivia but that you never look back. And later… When Pavetta… Do you know?
I do Geralt bowed his head. I sympathise with all my heart—
No she interrupted. It was long ago. I no longer wear mourning as you see. I did for long enough. Pavetta and Duny… Destined for each other. Until the very end. How can one not believe in the power of destiny?
They were both silent. Calanthe moved her foot and set the swing in motion again.
And so the Witcher has returned after six years as agreed she said slowly and a strange smile bloomed on her face. He has returned and demands the fulfilment of the oath. Do you think Geralt that storytellers will tell of our meeting in this way when a hundred years have passed? I think so. Except they will probably colour the tale tug on heart strings play on the emotions. Yes they know how. I can imagine it. Please listen. And the cruel Witcher spake thus: Fulfil your vow O Queen or my curse shall fall on you. And the queen weeping fulsomely fell on her knees before the Witcher crying: Have mercy! Do not take the child from me! It is all I have left!.
Calanthe—
Dont interrupt she said sharply. I am telling a story havent you noticed? Listen on. The evil cruel Witcher stamped his foot waved his arms and cried: Beware faithless one beware of fates vengeance. If you do not keep your vow you will never escape punishment. And the queen replied: Very well Witcher. Let it be as fate wishes it. Look over there where ten children are frolicking. Choose the one destined to you and you shall take it as your own and leave me with a broken heart.
The Witcher said nothing.
In the story Calanthes smile became more and more ugly the queen I presume would let the Witcher guess thrice. But we arent in a story Geralt. We are here in reality you and I and our problem. And our destiny. It isnt a fairy story its real life. Lousy evil onerous not sparing of errors harm sorrow disappointments or misfortunes; not sparing of anyone neither witchers nor queens. Which is why Geralt of Rivia you will only have one guess.
The Witcher still said nothing.
Just one single attempt Calanthe repeated. But as I said this is not a fairy tale but life which we must fill with moments of happiness for ourselves for as you know we cannot count on fate to smile on us. Which is why irrespective of the result of your choice you will not leave here with nothing. You will take one child. The one you choose. A child you will turn into a witcher. Assuming the child survives the Trial of the Grasses naturally.
Geralt jerked up his head. The queen smiled. He knew that smile hideous and evil contemptuous because it did not conceal its artificiality.
You are astonished she stated. Well Ive studied a little. Since Pavettas child has the chance of becoming a witcher I went to great pains. My sources Geralt reveal nothing however regarding how many children in ten withstand the Trial of the Grasses. Would you like to satisfy my curiosity in this regard?
O Queen Geralt said clearing his throat. You certainly went to sufficient pains in your studies to know that the code and my oath forbid me from even uttering that name much less discussing it.
Calanthe stopped the swing abruptly by jabbing a heel into the ground.
Three at most four in ten she said nodding her head in feigned pensiveness. A stringent selection very stringent Id say and at every stage. First the Choice and then the Trials. And then the Changes. How many youngsters ultimately receive medallions and silver swords? One in ten? One in twenty?
The Witcher said nothing.
Ive pondered long over this Calanthe continued now without a smile. And Ive come to the conclusion that the selection of the children at the stage of the Choice has scant significance. What difference does it make in the end Geralt which child dies or goes insane stuffed full of narcotics? What difference does it make whose brain bursts from hallucinations whose eyes rupture and gush forth instead of becoming cats eyes? What difference does it make whether the child destiny chose or an utterly chance one dies in its own blood and puke? Answer me.
The Witcher folded his arms on his chest in order to control their trembling.
Whats the point of this? he asked. Are you expecting an answer?
Youre right Im not the queen smiled again. As usual you are quite correct in your deductions. Who knows perhaps even though Im not expecting an answer I would like benignly to devote a little attention to your frank words freely volunteered? Words which who knows perhaps you would like to unburden yourself of and along with them whatever is oppressing your soul? But if not too bad. Come on lets get down to business we must supply the storytellers with material. Lets go and choose a child Witcher.
Calanthe he said looking her in the eyes. Its not worth worrying about storytellers. If they dont have enough material theyll make things up anyway. And if they do have authentic material at their disposal theyll distort it. As you correctly observed this isnt a fairy tale its life. Lousy and evil. And so damn it all lets live it decently and well. Lets keep the amount of harm done to others to the absolute minimum. In a fairy tale I grant you the queen has to beg the witcher and the witcher can demand whats his and stamp his foot. In real life the queen can simply say: Please dont take the child. And the Witcher can reply: Since you ask–I shall not. And go off into the setting sun. Such is life. But the storyteller wouldnt get a penny from his listeners for an ending to a fairy tale like that. At most theyd get a kick up the arse. Because its dull.
Calanthe stopped smiling and something he had seen once before flashed in her eyes.
What? she hissed. Lets not beat about the bush Calanthe. You know what I mean. As I came here so I shall leave. Should I choose a child? Why would I need one? Do you think it matters so much to me? That I came here to Cintra driven by an obsession to take your grandchild away from you? No Calanthe. I wanted perhaps to see this child look destiny in the eyes… For I dont know myself… But dont be afraid. I shant take it all you have to do is ask—
Calanthe sprang up from the bench and a green flame blazed in her eyes.
Ask? she hissed furiously. Me afraid? Of you? I should be afraid of you you accursed sorcerer? How dare you fling your scornful pity in my face? Revile me with your compassion? Accuse me of cowardice challenge my will? My overfamiliarity has emboldened you! Beware!
The Witcher decided not to shrug concluding it would be safer to genuflect and bow his head. He was not mistaken.
Well Calanthe hissed standing over him. Her hands were lowered clenched into fists bristling with rings. Well at last. That is the right response. One answers a queen from such a position when a queen asks one a question. And if it is not a question but an order one bows ones head even lower and goes off to carry it out without a moments delay. Is that clear?
Yes O Queen.
Splendid. Now stand up.
He stood up. She gazed at him and bit her lip.
Did my outburst offend you very much? I refer to the form not the content.
Not especially.
Good. I shall try not to flare up again. And so as I was saying ten children are playing in the moat. You will choose the one you regard as the most suitable you will take it and by the Gods make a witcher of it because that is what destiny expects. And if not destiny then know that I expect it.
He looked her in the eyes and bowed low. O Queen he said. Six years ago I proved to you that some things are more powerful than a queens will. By the Gods–if such exist–I shall prove that to you one more time. You will not compel me to make a choice I do not wish to make. I apologise for the form but not the content.
I have deep dungeons beneath the castle. I warn you one second more one word more and you will rot in them.
None of the children playing in the moat is fit to be a witcher he said slowly. And Pavettas son is not among them.
Calanthe squinted her eyes. He did not even shudder.
Come she finally said turning on her heel.
He followed her among rows of flowering shrubs among flower-beds and hedges. The queen entered an openwork summerhouse. Four large wicker chairs stood around a malachite table. A pitcher and two silver goblets stood on the veined table top supported by four legs in the shape of gryphons.
Be seated. And pour.
She drank to him vigorously lustily. Like a man. He responded in kind remaining standing.
Be seated she repeated. I wish to talk.
Yes maam.
How did you know Pavettas son is not among the children in the moat?
I didnt Geralt decided to be frank. It was a shot in the dark.
Aha. I might have guessed. And that none of them is fit to be a witcher? Is that true? And how were you able to tell that? Were you aided by magic?
Calanthe he said softly. I did not have to state it or find it out. What you said earlier contained the whole truth. Every child is fit. Selection decides. Later.
By the Gods of the Sea as my permanently absent husband would say! she laughed. So nothing is true? The whole Law of Surprise? Those legends about children that somebody was not expecting and about the ones who were first encountered? I suspected as much! Its a game! A game with chance a game with destiny! But its an awfully dangerous game Geralt.
I know.
A game based on somebodys suffering. Why then answer me are parents or guardians forced to make such difficult and burdensome vows? Why are children taken from them? After all there are plenty of children around who dont need to be taken away from anybody. Entire packs of homeless children and orphans roam the roads. One can buy a child cheaply enough in any village; every peasant is happy to sell one during the hungry gap for why worry when he can easily sire another? Why then? Why did you force an oath on Duny on Pavetta and on me? Why have you turned up here exactly six years after the birth of the child? And why dammit dont you want one why do you say its of no use?
He was silent. Calanthe nodded.
You do not reply she said leaning back in her chair. Lets ponder on the reason for your silence. Logic is the mother of all knowledge. And what does she hint at? What do we have here? A witcher searching for destiny concealed in the strange and doubtful Law of Surprise. The witcher finds his destiny. And suddenly gives it up. He claims not to want the Child of Destiny. His face is stony; ice and metal in his voice. He judges that a queen–a woman when alls said and done–may be tricked deceived by the appearances of hard maleness. No Geralt I shall not spare you. I know why you are declining the choice of a child. You are quitting because you do not believe in destiny. Because you are not certain. And you when you are not certain… you begin to fear. Yes Geralt. What leads you is fear. You are afraid. Deny that.
He slowly put the goblet down on the table. Slowly so that the clink of silver against malachite would not betray the uncontrollable shaking of his hand.
You do not deny it?
No.
She quickly leaned forward and seized his arm. Tightly.
You have gained in my eyes she said. And smiled. It was a pretty smile. Against his will almost certainly against his will he responded with a smile.
How did you arrive at that Calanthe?
I arrived at nothing she said without releasing his arm. It was a shot in the dark.
They both burst out laughing. And then sat in silence among the greenery and the scent of wild cherry blossom among the warmth and the buzzing of bees.
Geralt?
Yes Calanthe?
Dont you believe in destiny?
I dont know if I believe in anything. And as regards… I fear it isnt enough. Something more is necessary.
I must ask you something. What happened to you? I mean you were reputedly a Child of Destiny yourself. Mousesack claims—
No Calanthe. Mousesack was thinking about something completely different. Mousesack… He probably knows. But he uses those convenient myths when it suits him. Its not true that I was an unexpected encounter at home as a child. Thats not how I became a witcher. Im a commonplace foundling Calanthe. The unwanted bastard of a woman I dont remember. But I know who she is.
The queen looked at him penetratingly but the Witcher did not continue.
Are all stories about the Law of Surprise myths?
Yes. Its hard to call an accident destiny.
But you witchers do not stop searching?
No we dont. But its senseless. Nothing has any point.
Do you believe a Child of Destiny would pass through the Trials without danger?
We believe such a child would not require the Trials.
One question Geralt. Quite a personal one. May I?
He nodded.
There is no better way to pass on hereditary traits than the natural way as we know. You went through the Trials and survived. So if you need a child with special qualities and endurance… Why dont you find a woman who… Im tactless arent I? But I think Ive guessed havent I?
As usual he said smiling sadly you are correct in your deductions Calanthe. You guessed right of course. What youre suggesting is impossible for me.
Forgive me she said and the smile vanished from her face. Oh well its a human thing.
It isnt human.
Ah… So no witcher can—
No none. The Trial of the Grasses Calanthe is dreadful. And what is done to boys during the time of the Changes is even worse. And irreversible.
Dont start feeling sorry for yourself she muttered. Because it ill behooves you. It doesnt matter what was done to you. I can see the results. Quite satisfactory if you ask me. If I could assume that Pavettas child would one day be similar to you I wouldnt hesitate for a moment.
The risks are too great he said quickly. As you said. At most four out of ten survive.
Dammit is only the Trial of the Grasses hazardous? Do only potential witchers take risks? Life is full of hazards selection also occurs in life Geralt. Misfortune sicknesses and wars also select. Defying destiny may be just as hazardous as succumbing to it. Geralt… I would give you the child. But… Im afraid too.
I wouldnt take the child. I couldnt assume the responsibility. I wouldnt agree to burden you with it. I wouldnt want the child to tell you one day… As Im telling you—
Do you hate that woman Geralt?
My mother? No Calanthe. I presume she had a choice… Or perhaps she didnt? No but she did; a suitable spell or elixir would have been sufficient… A choice. A choice which should be respected for it is the holy and irrefutable right of every woman. Emotions are unimportant here. She had the irrefutable right to her decision and she took it. But I think that an encounter with her the face she would make then… Would give me something of a perverse pleasure if you know what I mean.
I know perfectly well what you mean she smiled. But you have slim chances of enjoying such a pleasure. I cannot judge your age Witcher but I suppose youre much much older than your appearance would indicate. So that woman—
That woman he interrupted coldly probably looks much much younger than I do now.
A sorceress?
Yes.
Interesting. I thought sorceresses couldnt…?
She probably thought so too.
Yes. But youre right lets not discuss a womans right to this decision because it is a matter beyond debate. Let us return to our problem. You will not take the child? Definitely?
Definitely.
And if… If destiny is not merely a myth? If it really exists doesnt a fear arise that it may backfire?
If it backfires itll backfire on me he answered placidly. For I am the one acting against it. You after all have carried out your side of the bargain. For if destiny isnt a myth I would have to choose the appropriate child among the ones you have shown me. But is Pavettas child among those children?
Yes Calanthe slowly nodded her head. Would you like to see it? Would you like to gaze into the eyes of destiny?
No. No I dont. I quit I renounce it. I renounce my right to the boy. I dont want to look destiny in the eyes because I dont believe in it. Because I know that in order to unite two people destiny is insufficient. Something more is necessary than destiny. I sneer at such destiny; I wont follow it like a blind man being led by the hand uncomprehending and naive. This is my irrevocable decision O Calanthe of Cintra.
The queen stood up. She smiled. He was unable to guess what lay behind her smile.
Let it be thus Geralt of Rivia. Perhaps your destiny was precisely to renounce it and quit? I think thats exactly what it was. For you should know that if you had chosen chosen correctly you would see that the destiny you mock has been sneering at you.
He looked into her glaring green eyes. She smiled. He could not decipher the smile.
There was a rosebush growing beside the summerhouse. He broke a stem and picked a flower kneeled down and proffered it to her holding it in both hands head bowed.
Pity I didnt meet you earlier White Hair she murmured taking the rose from his hands. Rise.
He stood up.
Should you change your mind she said lifting the rose up to her face. Should you decide… Come back to Cintra. I shall be waiting. And your destiny will also be waiting. Perhaps not forever but certainly for some time longer.
Farewell Calanthe.
Farewell Witcher. Look after yourself. I have… A moment ago I had a foreboding… A curious foreboding… that this is the last time I shall see you.
Farewell O Queen.
He awoke and discovered to his astonishment that the pain gnawing at his thigh had vanished. It also seemed that the throbbing swelling which was stretching the skin had stopped troubling him. He tried to reach it touch it but could not move. Before he realised that he was being held fast solely by the weight of the skins covering him a cold hideous dread ran down to his belly and dug into his guts like a hawks talons. He clenched and relaxed his fingers rhythmically repeating in his head no no Im not…
Paralysed.
You have woken.
A statement not a question. A quiet but distinct soft voice. A woman. Probably young. He turned his head and groaned trying to raise himself up.
Dont move. At least not so vigorously. Are you in pain?
Nnnn… the coating sticking his lips together broke. Nnno. The wound isnt… My back…
Bedsores. An unemotional cool statement which did not suit the soft alto voice. I shall remedy it. Here drink this. Slowly in small sips.
The scent and taste of juniper dominated the liquid. An old method he thought. Juniper or mint; both insignificant additives only there to disguise the real ingredients. In spite of that he recognised sewant mushrooms and possibly burdock. Yes certainly burdock burdock neutralises toxins it purifies blood contaminated by gangrene or infection.
Drink. Drink it all up. Not so fast or youll choke.
The medallion around his neck began to vibrate very gently. So there was also magic in the draught. He widened his pupils with difficulty. Now that she had raised his head he could examine her more precisely. She was dainty. She was wearing mens clothing. Her face was small and pale in the darkness.
Where are we?
In a tar makers clearing.
Indeed resin could be smelled in the air. He heard voices coming from the campfire. Someone had just thrown on some brushwood and flames shot upwards with a crackle. He looked again making the most of the light. Her hair was tied back with a snakeskin band. Her hair…
A suffocating pain in his throat and sternum. Hands tightly clenched into fists.
Her hair was red flame-red and when lit by the glow of the bonfire seemed as red as vermilion.
Are you in pain? she asked interpreting the emotion but wrongly. Now… Just a moment…
He sensed a sudden impact of warmth emanating from her hands spreading over his back flowing downwards to his buttocks.
We will turn you over she said. Dont try by yourself. You are very debilitated. Hey can someone help me?
Steps from the bonfire shadows shapes. Somebody leaned over. It was Yurga.
How are you feeling sir? Any better?
Help me turn him over on his belly said the woman. Gently slowly. Thats right… Good. Thank you.
He did not have to look at her anymore. Lying on his belly he did not have to risk looking her in the eyes. He calmed down and overcame the shaking of his hands. She could sense it. He heard the clasps of her bag clinking flacons and small porcelain jars knocking against each other. He heard her breath felt the warmth of her thigh. She was kneeling just beside him.
Was my wound he asked unable to endure the silence troublesome?
It was a little and there was coldness in her voice. It can happen with bites. The nastiest kinds of wound. But you must be familiar with it Witcher.
She knows. Shes digging around in my thoughts. Is she reading them? Probably not. And I know why. Shes afraid.
Yes you must be familiar with it she repeated clinking the glass vessels again. I saw a few scars on you… But I coped with them. I am as you see a sorceress. And a healer at the same time. Its my specialisation.
That adds up he thought. He did not say a word.
To return to the wound she continued calmly you ought to know that you were saved by your pulse; fourfold slower than a normal mans. Otherwise you wouldnt have survived I can say with complete honesty. I saw what had been tied around your leg. It was meant to be a dressing but it was a poor attempt.
He was silent.
Later she continued pulling his shirt up as far as his neck infection set in which is usual for bite wounds. It has been arrested. Of course you took the witchers elixir? That helped a lot. Though I dont understand why you took hallucinogens at the same time. I was listening to your ravings Geralt of Rivia.
She is reading my mind he thought. Or perhaps Yurga told her my name? Perhaps I was talking in my sleep under the influence of the Black Gull? Damned if I know… But knowing my name gives her nothing. Nothing. She doesnt know who I am. She has no idea who I am.
He felt her gently massage a cold soothing ointment with the sharp smell of camphor into his back. Her hands were small and very soft.
Forgive me for doing it the old way she said. I could have removed the bedsores using magic but I strained myself a little treating the wound on your leg and feel none too good. Ive bandaged the wound on your leg as much as I am able so now youre in no danger. But dont get up for the next few days. Even magically sutured blood vessels tend to burst and youd have hideous effusions. A scar will remain of course. One more for your collection.
Thanks… He pressed his cheek against the skins in order to distort his voice disguise its unnatural sound. May I ask… Whom should I thank?
She wont say he thought. Or shell lie.
My name is Visenna.
I know he thought.
Im glad he said slowly with his cheek still against the skins. Im glad our paths have crossed Visenna.
Why its chance she said coolly pulling his shirt down over his back and covering him with the sheepskins. I received word from the customs officers that I was needed. If Im needed I come. Its a curious habit I have. Listen Ill leave the ointment with the merchant; ask him to rub it on every morning and evening. He claims you saved his life he can repay you like that.
And me? How can I repay you Visenna?
Lets not talk about that. I dont take payment from witchers. Call it solidarity if you will. Professional solidarity. And affection. As part of that affection some friendly advice or if you wish a healers instructions: stop taking hallucinogens Geralt. They have no healing power. None at all.
Thank you Visenna. For your help and advice. Thank you… for everything.
He dug his hand out from under the skins and found her knee. She shuddered put her hand into his and squeezed it lightly. He cautiously released her fingers and slid his down over her forearm.
Of course. The soft skin of a young woman. She shuddered even more strongly but did not withdraw her arm. He brought his fingers back to her hand and joined his with hers.
The medallion on his neck vibrated and twitched.
Thank you Visenna he repeated trying to control his voice. Im glad our paths crossed.
Chance… she said but this time there was no coolness in her voice.
Or perhaps destiny? he asked astonished for the excitement and nervousness had suddenly evaporated from him completely. Do you believe in destiny Visenna?
Yes she replied after a while. I do.
That people linked by destiny will always find each other? he continued.
Yes I believe that too… What are you doing? Dont turn over…
I want to look into your face… Visenna. I want to look into your eyes. And you… You must look into mine.
She made a movement as though about to spring up from her knees. But she remained beside him. He turned over slowly lips twisting with pain. There was more light someone had put some more wood on the fire.
She was not moving now. She simply moved her head to the side offering her profile but this time he clearly saw her mouth quivering. She tightened her fingers on his hand powerfully.
He looked.
There was no similarity at all. She had an utterly different profile. A small nose. A narrow chin. She was silent. Then she suddenly leaned over him and looked him straight in the eye. From close up. Without a word.
How do you like my enhanced eyes? he asked calmly. Unusual arent they? Do you know Visenna what is done to witchers eyes to improve them? Do you know it doesnt always work?
Stop it she said softly. Stop it Geralt.
Geralt… he suddenly felt something tearing in him. Vesemir gave me that name. Geralt of Rivia! I even learned to imitate a Rivian accent. Probably from an inner need to possess a homeland. Even if it was an invented one. Vesemir… gave me my name. Vesemir also revealed yours. Not very willingly.
Be quiet Geralt. Be quiet.
You tell me today you believe in destiny. And back then… Did you believe back then? Oh yes you must have. You must have believed that destiny would bring us together. The fact you did nothing to quicken this encounter ought to be attributed to that.
She was silent.
I always wanted… I have pondered over what I would say to you when we finally met. Ive thought about the question I would ask you. I thought it would give me some sort of perverse pleasure…
What sparkled on her cheek was a tear. Undoubtedly. He felt his throat constrict until it hurt. He felt fatigue. Drowsiness. Weakness.
In the light of day… he groaned. Tomorrow in the sunshine Ill look into your eyes Visenna… And Ill ask you my question. Or perhaps I wont ask you because its too late. Destiny? Oh yes Yen was right. Its not sufficient to be destined for each other. Something more is needed… But tomorrow Ill look into your eyes… In the light of the sun…
No she said gently quietly velvety in a voice which gnawed at racked the layers of memory memory which no longer existed. Which should never have existed but had.
Yes! he protested. Yes. I want to—
No. Now you will fall asleep. And when you awake youll stop wanting. Why should we look at each other in the sunlight? What will it change? Nothing can now be reversed nothing changed. Whats the purpose of asking me questions Geralt? Does knowing that I wont be able to answer give you some kind of perverse pleasure? What will mutual hurt give us? No we wont look at each other in the daylight. Go to sleep Geralt. And just between us Vesemir did not give you that name. Although it doesnt change or reverse anything either Id like you to know that. Farewell and look after yourself. And dont try to look for me…
Visenna—
No Geralt. Now youll fall asleep. And I… I was a dream. Farewell.
No! Visenna!
Sleep. There was a soft order in her velvety voice breaking his will tearing it like cloth. Warmth suddenly emanating from her hands.
Sleep.
He slept.
Are we in Riverdell yet Yurga?
Have been since yesterday sir. Soon the River Yaruga and then my homeland. Look even the horses are walking more jauntily tossing their heads. They can sense home is near.
Home… Do you live in the city?
No outside the walls.
Interesting the Witcher said looking around. Theres almost no trace of war damage. I had heard this land was devastated.
Well Yurga said. One thing were not short of is ruins. Take a closer look–on almost every cottage in every homestead you can see the white timber of new joinery. And over there on the far bank just look it was even worse everything was burned right down to the ground… Well wars war but life must go on. We endured the greatest turmoil when the Black Forces marched through our land. True enough it looked then as though theyd turn everything here into a wasteland. Many of those who fled then never returned. But fresh people have settled in their place. Life must go on.
Thats a fact Geralt muttered. Life must go on. It doesnt matter what happened. Life must go on…
Youre right. Right there you are put them on. Ive mended your britches patched them up. Theyll be good as new. Its just like this land sir. It was rent by war ploughed up as if by the iron of a harrow ripped up bloodied. But now itll be good as new. And it will be even more fertile. Even those who rotted in the ground will serve the good and fertilise the soil. Presently it is hard to plough because the fields are full of bones and ironware but the earth can cope with iron too.
Are you afraid the Nilfgaardians the Black Forces will return? They found a way through the mountains once already…
Well were afeared. And what of it? Do we sit down and weep and tremble? Life must go on. And what will be will be. What is destined cant be avoided in any case.
Do you believe in destiny?
How can I not believe? After what I encountered on the bridge in the wilderness when you saved me from death? Oh Witcher sir youll see my wife will fall at your feet…
Oh come on. Frankly speaking I have more to be grateful to you for. Back there on the bridge… Thats my job after all Yurga my trade. I mean I protect people for money. Not out of the goodness of my heart. Admit it Yurga youve heard what people say about witchers. That no one knows whos worse; them or the monsters they kill—
Thats not true sir and I dont know why you talk like that. What dont I have eyes? Youre cut from the same cloth as that healer.
Visenna…
She didnt tell us her name. But she followed right behind us for she knew she was needed caught us up in the evening and took care of you at once having barely dismounted. You see sir she took great pains over your leg the air was crackling from all that magic and we fled into the forest out of fear. And then there was blood pouring from her nose. I see its not a simple thing working magic. You see she dressed your wound with such care truly like a—
Like a mother? Geralt clenched his teeth. Aye. Youve said it. And when you fell asleep…
Yes Yurga?
She could barely stand up she was as white as a sheet. But she came to check none of us needed any help. She healed the tar makers hand which had been crushed by a log. She didnt take a penny and even left some medicine. No Geralt sir I know what people say about Witchers and sorcerers in the world isnt all good. But not here. We from Upper Sodden and the people from Riverdell we know better. We owe too much to sorcerers not to know what theyre like. Memories about them here arent rumours and gossip but hewn in stone. Youll see for yourself just wait till we leave the copse. Anyway youre sure to know better yourself. For that battle was talked about all over the world and a year has barely passed. You must have heard.
I havent been here for a year the Witcher muttered. I was in the North. But I heard… The second Battle of Sodden…
Precisely. Youll soon see the hill and the rock. We used to call that hill Kite Top but now everybody calls it the Sorcerers Peak or the Mountain of the Fourteen. For twenty-two of them stood on that hill twenty-two sorcerers fought and fourteen fell. It was a dreadful battle sir. The earth reared up fire poured from the sky like rain and lightning bolts raged… Many perished. But the sorcerers overcame the Black Forces and broke the Power which was leading them. And fourteen of them perished in that battle. Fourteen laid down their lives… What sir? Whats the matter?
Nothing. Go on Yurga.
The battle was dreadful oh my but were it not for those sorcerers on the hill who knows perhaps we wouldnt be talking here today riding homeward for that home wouldnt exist nor me and maybe not you either… Yes it was thanks to the sorcerers. Fourteen of them perished defending us the people of Sodden and Riverdell. Ha certainly others also fought there soldiers and noblemen and peasants too. Whoever could took up a pitchfork or an axe or even a club… All of them fought valiantly and many fell. But the sorcerers… Its no feat for a soldier to fall for that is his trade after all and life is short anyhow. But the sorcerers could have lived as long they wished. And they didnt waver.
They didnt waver the Witcher repeated rubbing his forehead with a hand. They didnt waver. And I was in the North…
Whats the matter sir?
Nothing.
Yes… So now we–everyone from around here–take flowers there to that hill and in May at Beltane a fire always burns. And it shall burn there forever and a day. And forever shall they be in peoples memories that fourteen. And living like that in memory is… is… something more! More Geralt sir!
Youre right Yurga.
Every child of ours knows the names of the fourteen carved in the stone that stands on the top of the hill. Dont you believe me? Listen: Axel Raby Triss Merigold Atlan Kerk Vanielle of Brugge Dagobert of Vole—
Stop Yurga.
Whats the matter sir? Youre as pale as death!
Its nothing.
He walked uphill very slowly cautiously listening to the creaking of the sinews and muscles around the magically healed wound. Although it seemed to be completely healed he continued to protect the leg and not risk resting all his body weight on it. It was hot and the scent of grass struck his head pleasantly intoxicating him.
The obelisk was not standing in the centre of the hills flat top but was further back beyond the circle of angular stones. Had he climbed up there just before sunset the shadow of the menhir falling on the circle would have marked the precise diameter would have indicated the direction in which the faces of the sorcerers had been turned during the battle. Geralt looked in that direction towards the boundless undulating fields. If any bones of the fallen were still there–and there were for certain–they were covered by lush grass. A hawk was circling describing a calm circle on outspread wings. The single moving point in a landscape transfixed in the searing heat.
The obelisk was wide at the base–five people would have had to link hands in order to encircle it. It was apparent that without the help of magic it could not have been hauled up onto the hill. The surface of the menhir which was turned towards the stone circle was smoothly worked; runic letters could be seen engraved on it.
The names of the fourteen who fell.
He moved slowly closer. Yurga had been right. Flowers lay at the foot of the obelisk–ordinary wild flowers–poppies lupins mallows and forget-me-nots.
The names of the fourteen.
He read them slowly from the top and before him appeared the faces of those he had known.
The chestnut-haired Triss Merigold cheerful giggling for no reason looking like a teenager. He had liked her. And she had liked him.
Lawdbor of Murivel with whom he had almost fought in Vizima when he had caught the sorcerer using delicate telekinesis to tamper with dice in a game.
Lytta Neyd known as Coral. Her nickname derived from the colour of the lipstick she used. Lytta had once denounced him to King Belohun so he went to the dungeon for a week. After being released he went to ask her why. When still without knowing the reason he had ended up in her bed he spent another week there.
Old Gorazd who had offered him a hundred marks to let him dissect his eyes and a thousand for the chance to carry out a post mortem–not necessarily today–as he had put it then.
Three names remained.
He heard a faint rustling behind him and turned around.
She was barefoot in a simple linen dress. She was wearing a garland woven from daisies on long fair hair falling freely onto her shoulders and back.
Greetings he said.
She looked up at him with cold blue eyes but did not answer.
He noticed she was not suntanned. That was odd then at the end of the summer when country girls were usually tanned bronze. Her face and uncovered shoulders had a slight golden sheen.
Did you bring flowers?
She smiled and lowered her eyelashes. He felt a chill. She passed him without a word and knelt at the foot of the menhir touching the stone with her hand.
I do not bring flowers she said lifting her head. But the ones lying here are for me.
He looked at her. She knelt so that she was concealing the last name engraved in the stone of the menhir from him. She was bright unnaturally luminously bright against the stone.
Who are you? he asked slowly.
She smiled and emanated cold.
Dont you know?
Yes I do he thought gazing into the cold blue of her eyes. Yes I think I do.
He was tranquil. He could not be anything else. Not anymore.
Ive always wondered what you look like my lady.
You dont have to address me like that she answered softly. Weve known each other for years after all.
We have he agreed. They say you dog my footsteps.
I do. But you have never looked behind you. Until today. Today you looked back for the first time.
He was silent. He had nothing to say. He was weary.
How… How will it happen? he finally asked cold and emotionless.
Ill take you by the hand she said looking him directly in the eyes. Ill take you by the hand and lead you through the meadow. Into the cold wet fog.
And then? What is there beyond the fog?
Nothing she smiled. There is nothing more.
You dogged my every footstep he said. But struck down others those that I passed on my way. Why? I was meant to end up alone wasnt I? So I would finally begin to be afraid? Ill tell you the truth. I was always afraid of you; always. I never looked behind me out of fear. Out of terror that Id see you following me. I was always afraid my life has passed in fear. I was afraid… until today.
Until today?
Yes. Until today. Were standing here face to face but I dont feel any fear. Youve taken everything from me. Youve also taken the fear from me.
Then why are your eyes full of fear Geralt of Rivia? Your hands are trembling you are pale. Why? Do you fear the last–fourteenth–name engraved on the obelisk so much? If you wish I shall speak that name.
You dont have to. I know what it is. The circle is closing the snake is sinking its teeth into its own tail. That is how it must be. You and that name. And the flowers. For her and for me. The fourteenth name engraved in the stone a name that I have spoken in the middle of the night and in the sunlight during frosts and heat waves and rain. No Im not afraid to speak it now.
Then speak it.
Yennefer… Yennefer of Vengerberg.
And the flowers are mine.
Let us be done with this he said with effort. Take… Take me by the hand.
She stood up and came closer and he felt the coldness radiating from her; a sharp penetrating cold.
Not today she said. One day yes. But not today.
You have taken everything from me—
No she interrupted. I do not take anything. I just take people by the hand. So that no one will be alone at that moment. Alone in the fog… We shall meet again Geralt of Rivia. One day.
He did not reply. She turned around slowly and walked away. Into the mist which suddenly enveloped the hilltop into the fog which everything vanished into into the white wet fog into which melted the obelisk the flowers lying at its foot and the fourteen names engraved on it. There was nothing only the fog and the wet grass under his feet sparkling from drops of water
which smelled intoxicating heady sweet until his forehead ached he began to forget and become weary…
Geralt sir! Whats the matter? Did you fall asleep? I told you youre weak. Why did you climb up to the top?
I fell asleep. He wiped his face with his hand and blinked. I fell asleep dammit… Its nothing Yurga its this heat…
Aye its devilish hot… We ought to be going sir. Come along Ill aid you down the slope.
Theres nothing wrong with me…
Nothing nothing. Then I wonder why youre staggering. Why the hell did you go up the hill in such a heat? Wanted to read their names? I could have told you them all. Whats the matter?
Nothing… Yurga… Do you really remember all the names?
Certainly.
Ill see what your memorys like… The last one. The fourteenth. What name is it?
What a doubter you are. You dont believe in anything. You want to find out if Im lying? I told you didnt I that every youngster knows those names. The last one you say? Well the last one is Yoël Grethen of Carreras. Perhaps you knew him?
Geralt rubbed his eyelid with his wrist. And he glanced at the menhir. At all the names.
No he said. I didnt.
Geralt sir?
Yes Yurga?
The merchant lowered his head and said nothing for some time winding around a finger the remains of the thin strap with which he was repairing the Witchers saddle. He finally straightened up and gently tapped the servant driving the cart on the back with his fist.
Mount one of those spare horses Pokvit. Ill drive. Sit behind me on the box Geralt sir. Why are you hanging around the cart Pokvit? Go on ride on! We want to talk here we dont need your eyes!
Roach dawdling behind the cart neighed tugged at the tether clearly envious of Pokvits mare trotting down the highway.
Yurga clicked his tongue and tapped the horses lightly with the reins.
Well he said hesitantly. Its like this sir. I promised you… Back then on the bridge… I made a promise—
You neednt worry the Witcher quickly interrupted. Its not necessary Yurga.
But it is the merchant said curtly. Its my word. Whatever I find at home but am not expecting is yours.
Give over. I dont want anything from you. Were quits.
No sir. Should I find something like that at home it means its destiny. For if you mock destiny if you deceive it then it will punish you severely.
I know thought the Witcher. I know.
But… Geralt sir…
What Yurga?
I wont find anything at home Im not expecting. Nothing and for certain not what you were hoping for. Witcher sir hear this: after the last child my woman cannot have any more and whatever youre after there wont be an infant at home. Seems to me youre out of luck.
Geralt did not reply.
Yurga said nothing either. Roach snorted again and tossed her head.
But I have two sons Yurga suddenly said quickly looking ahead towards the road. Two; healthy strong and smart. I mean Ill have to get them apprenticed somewhere. One I thought would learn to trade with me. But the other…
Geralt said nothing.
What do you say? Yurga turned his head away and looked at him. You demanded a promise on the bridge. You had in mind a child for your witchers apprenticeship and nothing else didnt you? Why does that child have to be unexpected? Can it not be expected? Ive two so one of them could go for a witcher. Its a trade like any other. It aint better or worse.
Are you certain Geralt said softly it isnt worse?
Yurga squinted.
Protecting people saving their lives how do you judge that; bad or good? Those fourteen on the hill? You on that there bridge? What were you doing? Good or bad?
I dont know said Geralt with effort. I dont know Yurga. Sometimes it seems to me that I know. And sometimes I have doubts. Would you like your son to have doubts like that?
Why not? the merchant said gravely. He might as well. For its a human and a good thing.
What?
Doubts. Only evil sir never has any. But no one can escape his destiny.
The Witcher did not answer.
The highway curved beneath a high bluff under some crooked birch trees which by some miracle were hanging onto the vertical hillside. The birches had yellow leaves. Autumn Geralt thought its autumn again. A river sparkled down below the freshly-cut palisade of a watchtower shone white the roofs of cottages hewn stakes of the jetty. A windlass creaked. A ferry
was reaching the bank pushing a wave in front of it shoving the water with its blunt prow parting the sluggish straw and leaves in the dirty layer of dust floating on the surface. The ropes creaked as the ferrymen hauled them. The people thronged on the bank were clamouring. There was everything in the din: women screaming men cursing children crying cattle lowing horses neighing and sheep bleating. The monotonous bass music of fear.
Get away! Get away get back dammit! yelled a horseman head bandaged with a bloody rag. His horse submerged up to its belly thrashed around lifting its fore hooves high and splashing water. Yelling and cries from the jetty–the shield bearers were brutally jostling the crowd hitting out in all directions with the shafts of their spears.
Get away from the ferry! the horseman yelled swinging his sword around. Soldiers only! Get away afore I start cracking some skulls!
Geralt pulled on his reins holding back his mare who was dancing near the edge of the ravine.
Heavily armoured men weapons and armour clanging galloped along the ravine stirring up clouds of dust which obscured the shield bearers running in their wake.
Geraaaalt!
He looked down. A slim man in a cherry jerkin and a bonnet with an egrets feather was jumping up and down and waving his arms on an abandoned cart loaded with cages which had been shoved off the highway. Chickens and geese fluttered and squawked in the cages.
Geraaalt! Its me!
Dandelion! Come here!
Get away get away from the ferry! roared the horseman with the bandaged head on the jetty. The ferrys for the army only! If you want to get to the far bank scum seize your axes and get into the forest cobble together some rafts! The ferrys just for the army!
By the Gods Geralt the poet panted scrambling up the side of the ravine. His cherry jerkin was dotted as though by snow with birds feathers. Do you see whats happening? The Sodden forces have surely lost the battle and the retreat has begun. What am I saying? What retreat? Its a flight simply a panicked flight! And we have to scarper too Geralt. To the Yarugas far bank…
What are you doing here Dandelion? How did you get here?
What am I doing? the bard yelled. You want to know? Im fleeing like everybody else I was bumping along on that cart all day! Some whoreson stole my horse in the night! Geralt I beg you get me out of this hell! I tell you the Nilfgaardians could be here any moment! Whoever doesnt get the Yaruga behind them will be slaughtered. Slaughtered do you understand?
Dont panic Dandelion.
Below on the jetty the neighing of horses being pulled onto the ferry by force and the clattering of hooves on the planks. Uproar. A seething mass. The splash of water after a cart was pushed into the river the lowing of oxen holding their muzzles above the surface. Geralt looked on as the bundles and crates from the cart turned around in the current banged against the side of the ferry and drifted away. Screaming curses. In the ravine a cloud of dust hoof beats.
One at a time! yelled the bandaged soldier driving his horse into the crowd. Order dammit! One at a time!
Geralt Dandelion groaned seizing a stirrup. Do you see whats happening? We havent a chance of getting on that ferry. The soldiers will get as many across on it as they can and then theyll burn it so the Nilfgaardians wont be able to use it. Thats how its normally done isnt it?
Agreed the Witcher nodded. Thats how its normally done. I dont understand though why the panic? What is this the first war ever have there never been any others? Just like usual the kings forces beat each other up and then the kings reach agreement sign treaties and get plastered to celebrate. Nothing will really change for those having their ribs crushed on the jetty now. So why all this brutality?
Dandelion looked at him intently without releasing the stirrup.
You must have lousy information Geralt he said. Or youre unable to understand its significance. This isnt an ordinary war about succession to a throne or a small scrap of land. Its not a skirmish between two feudal lords which peasants watch while leaning on their pitchforks.
What is it then? Enlighten me because I really dont know what its about. Just between you and I it doesnt actually interest me that much but please explain.
Theres never been a war like this the bard said gravely. The Nilfgaard army are leaving scorched earth and bodies behind them. Entire fields of corpses. This is a war of destruction total destruction. Nilfgaard against everyone. Cruelty—
There is and has never been a war without cruelty the Witcher interrupted. Youre exaggerating Dandelion. Its like it is by the ferry: thats how its normally done. A kind of military tradition Id say. As long as the world has existed armies marching through a country kill plunder burn and rape; though not necessarily in that order. As long as the world has existed peasants have hidden in forests with their women and what they can carry and when everything is over return—
Not in this war Geralt. After this war there wont be anybody or anything to return to. Nilfgaard is leaving smouldering embers behind it the army is marching in a row and dragging everybody out. Scaffolds and stakes stretch for miles along the highways smoke is rising into the sky across the entire horizon. You said there hasnt been anything like this since the world has existed? Well you were right. Since the world has existed. Our world. For it looks as though the Nilfgaardians have come from beyond the mountains to destroy our world.
That makes no sense. Who would want to destroy the world? Wars arent waged to destroy. Wars are waged for two reasons. One is power and the other is money.
Dont philosophise Geralt! You wont change whats happening with philosophy! Why wont you listen? Why wont you see? Why dont you want to understand? Believe me the Yaruga wont stop the Nilfgaardians. In the winter when the river freezes over theyll march on. I tell you we must flee flee to the North; they may not get that far. But even if they dont our world will never be what it was. Geralt dont leave me here! Ill never survive by myself! Dont leave me!
You must be insane Dandelion the Witcher said leaning over in the saddle. You must be insane with fear if you could think Id leave you. Give me your hand and jump up on the horse. Theres nothing for you here nor will you shove your way onto the ferry. Ill take you upstream and then well hunt for a boat or a ferry.
The Nilfgaardians will capture us! Theyre close now. Did you see those horsemen? They are clearly coming straight from the fighting. Lets ride downstream towards the mouth of the Ina.
Stop looking on the dark side. Well slip through youll see. Crowds of people are heading downstream itll be the same at every ferry as it is here theyre sure to have nabbed all the boats too. Well ride upstream against the current. Dont worry Ill get you across on a log if I have to.
The far banks barely visible!
Dont whinge. I said Id get you across.
What about you?
Hop up onto the horse. Well talk on the way. Hey not with that bloody sack! Do you want to break Roachs back?
Is it Roach? Roach was a bay and shes a chestnut.
All of my horses are called Roach. You know that perfectly well; dont try to get round me. I said get rid of that sack. Whats in it dammit? Gold?
Manuscripts! Poems! And some vittles…
Throw it into the river. You can write some new poems. And Ill share my food with you.
Dandelion made a forlorn face but did not ponder long and hurled the sack into the water. He jumped onto the horse and wriggled around making a place for himself on the saddlebags and grabbed the Witchers belt.
Time to go time to go he urged anxiously. Lets not waste time Geralt well disappear into the forest before—
Stop it Dandelion. That panic of yours is beginning to affect Roach.
Dont mock. If youd seen what I—
Shut up dammit. Lets ride Id like to get you across before dusk.
Me? What about you?
I have matters to deal with on this side of the river.
You must be mad Geralt. Do you have a death wish? What matters?
None of your business. Im going to Cintra.
To Cintra? Cintra is no more.
What do you mean?
There is no Cintra. Just smouldering embers and piles of rubble. The Nilfgaardians—
Dismount Dandelion.
What?
Get off! The Witcher jerked around. The troubadour looked at his face and leaped from the horse onto the ground took a step back and stumbled.
Geralt got off slowly. He threw the reins across the mares head stood for a moment undecided and then wiped his face with a gloved hand. He sat down on the edge of a tree hollow beneath a spreading dogwood bush with blood-red branches.
Come here Dandelion he said. Sit down. And tell me whats happened to Cintra. Everything.
The poet sat down.
The Nilfgaardians invaded across the passes he began after a moments silence. There were thousands of them. They surrounded the Cintran army in the Marnadal valley. A battle was joined lasting the whole day from dawn till dusk. The forces of Cintra fought courageously but were decimated. The king fell and then their queen—
Calanthe.
Yes. She headed off a stampede didnt let them disperse gathered anyone she was able to around herself and the standard. They fought their way through the encirclement and fell back across the river towards the city. Whoever was able to.
And Calanthe?
She defended the river crossing with a handful of knights and shielded the retreat. They say she fought like a man threw herself like a woman possessed into the greatest turmoil. They stabbed her with pikes as she charged the Nilfgaardian foot. She was transported to the city gravely wounded. Whats in that canteen Geralt?
Vodka. Want some?
What do you think?
Speak. Go on Dandelion. Tell me everything.
The city didnt put up a fight. There was no siege because there was no one to defend the walls. What was left of the knights and their families the noblemen and the queen… They barricaded themselves in the castle. The Nilfgaardians captured the castle at once their sorcerers pulverised the gate and some of the walls. Only the keep was being defended clearly protected by spells because it resisted the Nilfgaardian magic. In spite of that the Nilfgaardians forced their way inside within four days. They didnt find anyone alive. Not a soul. The women had killed the children the men had killed the women and then fallen on their swords or… Whats the matter Geralt?
Speak Dandelion.
Or… like Calanthe… Headlong from the battlements from the very top. They say she asked someone to… But no one would. So she crawled to the battlements and… Headfirst. They say dreadful things were done to her body. I dont want to… Whats the matter?
Nothing. Dandelion… In Cintra there was a… little girl. Calanthes granddaughter she was around ten or eleven. Her name was Ciri. Did you hear anything about her?
No. But there was a terrible massacre in the city and the castle and almost no one got out alive. And nobody survived of those who defended the keep I told you. And most of the women and children from the notable families were there.
The Witcher said nothing.
That Calanthe Dandelion asked. Did you know her?
Yes.
And the little girl you were asking about? Ciri?
I knew her too.
The wind blew from the river rippled the water shook the trees and the leaves fell from the branches in a shimmering shower. Autumn thought the Witcher its autumn again.
He stood up.
Do you believe in destiny Dandelion?
The troubadour raised his head and looked at him with his eyes wide open.
Why do you ask?
Answer.
Well… yes.
But did you know that destiny alone is not enough? That something more is necessary?
I dont understand.
Youre not the only one. But thats how it is. Something more is needed. The problem is that… that I wont ever find out what.
Whats the matter Geralt?
Nothing Dandelion. Come get on. Lets go were wasting the day. Who knows how long itll take us to find a boat and well need a big one. Im not leaving Roach after all.
Are we crossing the river today? the poet asked happily.
Yes. Theres nothing for me on this side of the river.
Yurga!
Darling!
She ran from the gate–her hair escaping her headscarf blowing around–stumbling and crying out. Yurga threw the halter to his servant jumped down from the cart ran to meet his wife seized her around the waist lifted her up and spun her whirled her around.
Im home my darling! Ive returned!
Yurga!
Im back! Hey throw open the gates! The man of the house has returned!
She was wet smelling of soap suds. She had clearly been doing the laundry. He stood her on the ground but she still did not release him and remained clinging trembling warm.
Lead me inside.
By the Gods youve returned… I couldnt sleep at night… Yurga… I couldnt sleep at night—
Ive returned. Oh Ive returned! And Ive returned with riches! Do you see the cart? Hey hurry drive it in! Do you see the cart? Im carrying enough goods to—
Yurga what are goods to me or a cart… Youve returned… Healthy… In one piece—
Ive returned wealthy I tell you. Youll see directly—
Yurga? But whos that? That man in black? By the Gods and with a sword—
The merchant looked around. The Witcher had dismounted and was standing with his back to them pretending to be adjusting the girth and saddlebags. He did not look at them did not approach.
Ill tell you later. Oh but if it werent for him… But where are the lads? Hale?
Yes Yurga theyre hale. They went to the fields to shoot at crows but the neighbours will tell them youre back. Theyll soon rush home the three of them—
Three? What do you mean Goldencheeks? Were you—
No… But I must tell you something… You wont be cross?
Me? With you?
Ive taken a lassie in Yurga. I took her from the druids you know the ones who rescued children after the war? They gathered homeless and stray children in the forests… Barely alive… Yurga? Are you cross?
Yurga held a hand to his forehead and looked back. The Witcher was walking slowly behind the cart leading his horse. He was not looking at them his head turned away.
Yurga?
O Gods the merchant groaned. O Gods! Something I wasnt expecting! At home!
Dont take on Yurga… Youll see youll like her. Shes a clever lassie pleasing hardworking… A mite odd. She wont say where shes from she weeps at once if you ask. So I dont. Yurga you know I always wished for a daughter… What ails you?
Nothing he said softly. Nothing. Destiny. The whole way he was raving in his sleep delirious ravings nothing but destiny and destiny… By the Gods… Its not for the likes of us to understand. We cant mark what people like him think. What they dream about. Its not for us to understand…
Dad!
Nadbor! Sulik! How youve grown a pair of young bulls! Well come here to me! Look alive…
He broke off seeing a small very slim mousy-haired creature walking slowly behind the boys. The little girl looked at him and he saw the huge eyes as green as spring grass shining like two little stars. He saw the girl suddenly start run… He heard her shrill piercing cry.
Geralt!
The Witcher turned away from his horse with a swift agile movement and ran to meet her. Yurga stared open-mouthed. He had never thought a man could move so quickly.
They came together in the centre of the farmyard. The mousy-haired girl in a grey dress. And the white-haired Witcher with a sword on his back all dressed in black leather gleaming with silver. The Witcher bounding softly the girl trotting the Witcher on his knees the girls thin hands around his neck the mousy hair on his shoulders. Goldencheeks shrieked softly. Yurga hugged his rosy-cheeked wife when she cried out softly pulling her towards him without a word and gathered up and hugged both boys.
Geralt! the little girl repeated clinging to the Witchers chest. You found me! I knew you would! I always knew! I knew youd find me!
Ciri said the Witcher.
Yurga could not see his face hidden among the mousy hair. He saw hands in black gloves squeezing the girls back and shoulders.
You found me! Oh Geralt! I was waiting all the time! For so very long… Well be together now wont we? Now well be together wont we? Say it Geralt! Forever! Say it!
Forever Ciri.
Its like they said! Geralt! Its like they said! Am I your destiny? Say it! Am I your destiny?
Yurga saw the Witchers eyes. And was very astonished. He heard his wifes soft weeping felt the trembling of her shoulders. He looked at the Witcher and waited tensed for his answer. He knew he would not understand it but he waited for it. And heard it.
Youre more than that Ciri. Much more.
extras
meet the author
Andrzej Sapkowski was born in 1948 in Poland. He studied economy and business but the success of his fantasy cycle about the sorcerer Geralt of Rivia turned him into a bestselling writer. He is now one of Polands most famous and successful authors.
Also by Andrzej Sapkowski
The Last Wish
Blood of Elves
The Time of Contempt
Baptism of Fire
Sword of Destiny
The Malady and Other Stories: An Andrzej Sapkowski Sampler (e-only)
introducing
If you enjoyed
SWORD OF DESTINY
look out for
BLOOD OF ELVES
Book 1 of the Witcher
by Andrzej Sapkowski
Watch for the signs! What signs these shall be I say unto you: first the earth will flow with the blood of Aen Seidhe the Blood of Elves…
For over a century humans dwarves gnomes and elves have lived together in relative peace. But times have changed the uneasy peace is over and now the races are fighting once again. The only good elf it seems is a dead elf.
Geralt of Rivia the cunning assassin known as The Witcher has been waiting for the birth of a prophesied child. This child has the power to change the world—for good or for evil.
As the threat of war hangs over the land and the child is hunted for her extraordinary powers it will become Geralts responsibility to protect them all—and the Witcher never accepts defeat.
CHAPTER ONE
The town was in flames.
The narrow streets leading to the moat and the first terrace belched smoke and embers flames devouring the densely clustered thatched houses and licking at the castle walls. From the west from the harbour gate the screams and clamour of vicious battle and the dull blows of a battering ram smashing against the walls grew ever louder.
Their attackers had surrounded them unexpectedly shattering the barricades which had been held by no more than a few soldiers a handful of townsmen carrying halberds and some crossbowmen from the guild. Their horses decked out in flowing black caparisons flew over the barricades like spectres their riders bright glistening blades sowing death amongst the fleeing defenders.
Ciri felt the knight who carried her before him on his saddle abruptly spur his horse. She heard his cry. Hold on he shouted. Hold on!
Other knights wearing the colours of Cintra overtook them sparring even in full flight with the Nilfgaardians. Ciri caught a glimpse of the skirmish from the corner of her eye – the crazed swirl of blue-gold and black cloaks amidst the clash of steel the clatter of blades against shields the neighing of horses—
Shouts. No not shouts. Screams.
Hold on!
Fear. With every jolt every jerk every leap of the horse pain shot through her hands as she clutched at the reins. Her legs contracted painfully unable to find support her eyes watered from the smoke. The arm around her suffocated her choking her the force compressing her ribs. All around her screaming such as she had never before heard grew louder. What must one do to a man to make him scream so?
Fear. Overpowering paralysing choking fear.
Again the clash of iron the grunts and snorts of the horses. The houses whirled around her and suddenly she could see windows belching fire where a moment before thered been nothing but a muddy little street strewn with corpses and cluttered with the abandoned possessions of the fleeing population. All at once the knight at her back was wracked by a strange wheezing cough. Blood spurted over the hands grasping the reins. More screams. Arrows whistled past.
A fall a shock painful bruising against armour. Hooves pounded past her a horses belly and a frayed girth flashing by above her head then another horses belly and a flowing black caparison. Grunts of exertion like a lumberjacks when chopping wood. But this isnt wood; its iron against iron. A shout muffled and dull and something huge and black collapsed into the mud next to her with a splash spurting blood. An armoured foot quivered thrashed goring the earth with an enormous spur.
A jerk. Some force plucked her up pulled her onto another saddle. Hold on! Again the bone-shaking speed the mad gallop. Arms and legs desperately searching for support. The horse rears. Hold on!… There is no support. There is no… There is no… There is blood. The horse falls. Its impossible to jump aside no way to break free to escape the tight embrace of these chainmail-clad arms. There is no way to avoid the blood pouring onto her head and over her shoulders.
A jolt the squelch of mud a violent collision with the ground horrifically still after the furious ride. The horses harrowing wheezes and squeals as it tries to regain its feet. The pounding of horseshoes fetlocks and hooves flashing past. Black caparisons and cloaks. Shouting.
The street is on fire a roaring red wall of flame. Silhouetted before it a rider towers over the flaming roofs enormous. His black-caparisoned horse prances tosses its head neighs.
The rider stares down at her. Ciri sees his eyes gleaming through the slit in his huge helmet framed by a bird of preys wings. She sees the fire reflected in the broad blade of the sword held in his lowered hand.
The rider looks at her. Ciri is unable to move. The dead mans motionless arms wrapped around her waist hold her down. She is locked in place by something heavy and wet with blood something which is lying across her thigh pinning her to the ground.
And she is frozen in fear: a terrible fear which turns her entrails inside out which deafens Ciri to the screams of the wounded horse the roar of the blaze the cries of dying people and the pounding drums. The only thing which exists which counts which still has any meaning is fear. Fear embodied in the figure of a black knight wearing a helmet decorated with feathers frozen against the wall of raging red flames.
The rider spurs his horse the wings on his helmet fluttering as the bird of prey takes to flight launching itself to attack its helpless victim paralysed with fear. The bird – or maybe the knight – screeches terrifyingly cruelly triumphantly. A black horse black armour a black flowing cloak and behind this – flames. A sea of flames.
Fear.
The bird shrieks. The wings beat feathers slap against her face. Fear!
Help! Why doesnt anyone help me? Alone weak helpless – I cant move cant force a sound from my constricted throat. Why does no one come to help me?
Im terrified!
Eyes blaze through the slit in the huge winged helmet. The black cloak veils everything—
Ciri!
She woke numb and drenched in sweat with her scream – the scream which had woken her – still hanging in the air still vibrating somewhere within her beneath her breast-bone and burning against her parched throat. Her hands ached clenched around the blanket; her back ached…
Ciri. Calm down.
The night was dark and windy the crowns of the surrounding pine trees rustling steadily and melodiously their limbs and trunks creaking in the wind. There was no malevolent fire no screams only this gentle lullaby. Beside her the campfire flickered with light and warmth its reflected flames glowing from harness buckles gleaming red in the leather-wrapped and iron-banded hilt of a sword leaning against a saddle on the ground. There was no other fire and no other iron. The hand against her cheek smelled of leather and ashes. Not of blood.
Geralt—
It was just a dream. A bad dream.
Ciri shuddered violently curling her arms and legs up tight.
A dream. Just a dream.
The campfire had already died down; the birch logs were red and luminous occasionally crackling giving off tiny spurts of blue flame which illuminated the white hair and sharp profile of the man wrapping a blanket and sheepskin around her.
Geralt I—
Im right here. Sleep Ciri. You have to rest. Weve still a long way ahead of us.
I can hear music she thought suddenly. Amidst the rustling of the trees… theres music. Lute music. And voices. The Princess of Cintra… A child of destiny… A child of Elder Blood the blood of elves. Geralt of Rivia the White Wolf and his destiny. No no thats a legend. A poets invention. The princess is dead. She was killed in the town streets while trying to escape…
Hold on… !Hold…
Geralt?
What Ciri?
What did he do to me? What happened? What did he… do to me?
Who?
The knight… The black knight with feathers on his helmet… I cant remember anything. He shouted… and looked at me. I cant remember what happened. Only that I was frightened… I was so frightened…
The man leaned over her the flame of the campfire sparkling in his eyes. They were strange eyes. Very strange. Ciri had been frightened of them she hadnt liked meeting his gaze. But that had been a long time ago. A very long time ago.
I cant remember anything she whispered searching for his hand as tough and coarse as raw wood. The black knight—
It was a dream. Sleep peacefully. It wont come back.
Ciri had heard such reassurances in the past. They had been repeated to her endlessly; many many times she had been offered comforting words when her screams had woken her during the night. But this time it was different. Now she believed it. Because it was Geralt of Rivia the White Wolf the Witcher who said it. The man who was her destiny. The one for whom she was destined. Geralt the Witcher who had found her surrounded by war death and despair who had taken her with him and promised they would never part.
She fell asleep holding tight to his hand.
PROLOGUE
For the past two weeks the simple building had been his safe house but now Thren Felhorn distrusted its protection as he limped through the door. He clutched his right arm to his body fighting to halt its trembling. Blood ran from his shoulder to his elbow the arm cut by a poisoned blade.
Damn you Leon he said as he staggered across the wood floor through a sparsely decorated room and up to a wall made of plaster and oak. Even with his blurred vision he located the slight groove with his fingers. He pressed down detaching an iron lock on the other side of the wall. A small door swung inward.
The master of the Spider Guild collapsed in a chair and removed his gray hood and cloak. He sat in a much larger room painted silver and decorated with pictures of mountains and fields. Removing his shirt he gritted his teeth while pulling it over his wounded arm. The toxin had been meant to paralyze him not kill him but the fact was little comfort. Most likely Leon Connington had wanted him alive so he could sit in his padded chair and watch his gentle touchers bleed Thren drop by drop. The fat mans treacherous words from their meeting ignited a fire in his gut that refused to die.
We will not cower to rats that live off our shit Leon had said while brushing his thin mustache. Do you really think you stand a chance against the wealth of the Trifect? We could buy your soul from the gods.
Such arrogance. Such pride. Thren had fought down his initial impulse to bury a short sword in the fat mans throat upon hearing such mockery. For centuries the three families of the Trifect the Conningtons the Keenans and the Gemcrofts had ruled in the shadows. Over that time theyd certainly bought enough priests and kings to believe that the gods wouldnt be beyond the reach of their gilded fingers either.
It had been a mistake to deny his original impulse Thren knew. Leon should have bled out then and there his guards be damned. Theyd met inside Leons extravagant mansion another mistake. Thren vowed to correct his carelessness in the coming months. For three years hed done his best to stop the war from erupting but it appeared everyone in the city of Veldaren desired chaos.
If the city wants blood it can have it Thren thought. But it wont be mine.
Is that you Father? he heard his elder son ask from an adjacent room.
It is Thren said holding his anger in check. But if it were not what would you do having given away your presence?
His son Randith entered from the other room. He looked much like his father having the same sharp features thin nose and grim smile. His hair was brown like his mothers and that alone endeared him to Thren. They both wore the gray trousers of their guild and from Randiths shoulders hung a gray cloak similar to Threns. A long rapier hung from one side of Randiths belt a dagger from the other. His blue eyes met his fathers.
Id kill you Randith said a cocky grin pulling up the left side of his face. As if I need surprise to do it.
Shut the damn door Thren said ignoring the bravado. Wheres our mage? Conningtons men cut me with a toxin and its effect is… troublesome.
Troublesome hardly described it but Thren wouldnt let his son know that. His flight from the mansion was a blur in his memory. The toxin had numbed his arm and made his entire side sting with pain. His neck muscles had fired off at random and one of his knees kept locking up during his run. Like a cripple hed fled through the alleyways of Veldaren but the moon was waning and the streets empty so none had seen his pathetic stumbling.
Not here Randith said as he leaned toward his fathers exposed shoulder and examined the cut.
Then go find him Thren said. How did events go at the Gemcroft mansion?
Maynard Gemcrofts men fired arrows from their windows as we approached Randith said. He turned his back to his father and opened a few cupboards until he found a small black bottle. He popped the cork but when he moved to pour the liquid on his fathers cut Thren yanked the bottle out of his hand. Dripping the brown liquid across the cut he let out a hiss through clenched teeth. It burned like fire but already he felt the tingle of the toxin beginning to fade. When finished he accepted some strips of cloth from his son and tied them tight around the wound.
Where is Aaron? Thren asked when the pain subsided. If you wont fetch the mage at least he will.
Lurking as always Randith said. Reading too. I tell him mercenaries may soon storm in with orders to eradicate all thief guilds and he looks at me like Im a lowly fishmonger mumbling about the weather.
Thren held in a grimace.
Youre too impatient with him he said. Aaron understands more than you think.
Hes soft and a coward. This life will never suit him.
Thren reached out with his good hand grabbed Randith by the front of his shirt and yanked him close so they might stare face-to-face.
Listen well he said. Aaron is my son as are you. Whatever contempt you have you swallow it down. Even the wealthiest king is still dirt in my eyes compared to my own flesh and blood and I expect the same respect from you.
He shoved Randith away then called out farther into the hideout.
Aaron! Your family needs you now come in here.
A short child of eight stepped into the room clutching a worn book to his chest. His features were soft and curved and he would no doubt grow up to be a comely man. He had his fathers hair though a soft blond that curled around his ears and hung low to his deep blue eyes. He fell to one knee and bowed his head without saying a word all while still holding the book.
Do you know where Cregon is? Thren asked referring to the mage in their employ. Aaron nodded. Good. Where?
Aaron said nothing. Thren tired and wounded had no time for his younger sons nonsense. While other children grew up babbling nonstop a good day for Aaron involved nine words and rarely would they be used in one sentence.
Tell me where he is or youll taste blood on your tongue Randith said sensing his fathers exasperation.
He went away Aaron said his voice barely above a whisper. Hes a fool.
A fool or not hes my fool and damn good at keeping us alive Thren said. Go bring him here. If he argues slash your finger across your neck. Hell understand.
Aaron bowed and did as he was told.
I wonder if hes practicing for a vow of silence Randith said as he watched his brother leave without any hurry.
Did he lock the outer door? Thren asked.
Shut and latched Randith said after checking.
Then hes smarter than you.
Randith smirked.
If you say so. But right now I think we have bigger concerns. The Gemcrofts firing at my men Leon setting up a trap… this means war doesnt it?
Thren swallowed hard then nodded.
The Trifect have turned their backs on peace. They want blood our blood and unless we act fast they are going to get it.
Perhaps if we offer even more in bribes? Randith suggested.
Thren shook his head.
Theyve tired of the game. We rob them until they are red with rage then pay bribes with their own wealth. Youve seen how much theyve invested in mercenaries over the past few months. Their minds are set. They want us exterminated.
Thats ludicrous Randith insisted. Youve united nearly every guild in the city. Between our assassins our spies our thugs… what makes them think they can withstand all-out war?
Thren frowned as Randiths fingers drummed the hilt of his rapier.
Give me a few of our best men his son said. When Leon Connington bleeds out in his giant bed the rest will learn that accepting our bribes is far better than accepting our mercy.
You are still a young man Thren said. You are not ready for what Leon has prepared.
I am seventeen Randith said. A man grown and I have more kills to my name than years.
And Ive more than youve drawn breaths Thren said a hard edge entering his voice. But even I will not return to that mansion. They are eager for this cant you see that? Entire guilds will be wiped out in days. Those who survive will inherit this city and I will not have my heir run off and die in the opening hours.
Thren placed one of his short swords on the table with his uninjured hand. Holding it there he met Randiths gaze challenging him looking to see just what sort of man his son truly was.
Ill leave the mansion be as you suggest Randith said. But I will not cower and hide. You are right Father. These are the opening hours. Our actions here will decide the course of months of fighting. Let the merchants and nobles hide. We rule the night.
He pulled his gray cloak over his head and turned to the hidden door. Thren watched him go his hands shaking but not from the toxin.
Be wary Thren said careful to keep his face a mask. Everything you do has consequences.
If Randith sensed the threat he didnt let it show.
Ill go get Senke said Randith. Hell watch over you until Aaron returns with the mage.
Then he was gone. Thren struck the table with his palm and swore. He thought of the countless hours hed invested in Randith the training the sparring and the many lectures all in an attempt to cultivate a worthy heir for the Spider Guild.
Wasted Thren thought. Wasted.
He heard the click of the latch and then the door creaked open. Thren expected the mage or perhaps his son returning to smooth over his abrupt exit but instead a short man with a black cloth wrapped around his face stepped inside.
Dont run the intruder said. Thren snapped up his short sword and blocked the first two blows from the mans dagger. He tried to counter but his vision was still blurred and his speed a pathetic remnant of his finely honed reflexes. A savage chop knocked the sword from his hand. Thren fell back using his chair to force a stumble out of his pursuer. The best he could do was limp though and when a heel kicked his knee he fell. He spun refusing to die with a dagger in his back.
Leon sends his greetings the man said his dagger pulled back for a final lethal blow.
He suddenly jerked forward his eyes widening. The dagger fell from his limp hand as the would-be assassin collapsed. Behind him stood Aaron holding a bloody short sword. Threns eyes widened as his younger son knelt. The flat edge rested on his palms blood running down his wrists.
Your sword Aaron said presenting the blade.
How… why did you return? Thren asked.
The man was hiding the boy said his voice still quiet. He didnt sound the least bit upset. Waiting for us to go. So I waited for him.
Thren felt the corners of his mouth twitch. He took the sword from a boy who spent his days reading underneath his bed and skulking within closets often mocked by his older brother for being too soft. A boy who never threw a punch when forced into a fight never dared raise his voice in anger.
A boy who had killed a man at the age of eight.
I know youre bright Thren said. But the life we live is twisted and we are forever surrounded by liars and betrayers. You must trust your instincts and learn to listen to not just what is said but what is not. Can you do this? Can you view men and women as if they are pieces to a game and understand what must be done my son?
Aaron looked up at him. If he was bothered by the blood on him it didnt show.
I can Aaron said.
Good said Thren. Wait with me. Randith will return soon.
Ten minutes later the door crept open.
Father? Randith asked as he stepped inside. Senke Threns right-hand man was with him. He looked slightly older than Randith with a trimmed blond beard and a thick mace held in hand. They both startled at the dead body lying on the floor a gaping wound in its back.
He waited until you left Thren said from his chair which hed positioned to face the entrance.
Where? Randith asked. He pointed to Aaron. And why is he here?
Thren shook his head.
You dont understand Randith. You disobey me not out of wisdom but out of arrogance and pride. You treat our enemies with contempt instead of respect worthy of their danger. Worst of all you put my life at risk.
He looked to Aaron back to Randith.
Too many mistakes he said. Far too many.
Then he waited. And hoped.
Aaron stepped toward his older brother. His blue eyes were calm unworried. In a single smooth motion he yanked Randiths dagger from his belt flipped it around and thrust it to the hilt in his brothers chest. Senke stepped back jaw hanging open but he wisely held his tongue. Aaron withdrew the dagger spun around and presented it as a gift to his father.
Thren rose from his seat and placed a hand on Aarons shoulder.
You did well my son he said. My heir.
Thank you Aaron whispered tears in his eyes. He bowed low as behind him the body of his brother bled out on the floor.
CHAPTER ONE
Birds were chirping loudly in the undergrowth.
The slopes of the ravine were overgrown with a dense tangled mass of brambles and barberry; a perfect place for nesting and feeding. Not surprisingly it was teeming with birds. Greenfinches trilled loudly redpolls and whitethroats twittered and chaffinches gave out ringing vink-vinks every now and then. The chaffinchs call signals rain thought Milva glancing up at the sky. There were no clouds. But chaffinches always warn of the rain. We could do with a little rain.
Such a spot opposite the mouth of a ravine was a good place for a hunter giving a decent chance of a kill–particularly here in Brokilon Forest which was abundant with game. The dryads who controlled extensive tracts of the forest rarely hunted and humans dared to venture into it even less often. Here a hunter greedy for meat or pelts became the quarry himself. The Brokilon dryads showed no mercy to intruders. Milva had once discovered that for herself.
No Brokilon was not short of game. Nonetheless Milva had been waiting in the undergrowth for more than two hours and nothing had crossed her line of sight. She couldnt hunt on the move; the drought which had lasted for more than a month had lined the forest floor with dry brush and leaves which rustled and crackled at every step. In conditions like these only standing still and unseen would lead to success and a prize.
An admiral butterfly alighted on the nock of her bow. Milva didnt shoo it away but watched it closing and opening its wings. She also looked at her bow a recent acquisition which she still wasnt tired of admiring. She was a born archer and loved a good weapon. And she was holding the best of the best.
Milva had owned many bows in her life. She had learned to shoot using ordinary ash and yew bows but soon gave them up for composite reflex bows of the type elves and dryads used. Elven bows were shorter lighter and more manageable and owing to the laminated composition of wood and animal sinew much quicker than yew bows. An arrow shot with them reached the target much more swiftly and along a flatter arc which considerably reduced the possibility of its being blown off course. The best examples of such weapons bent fourfold bore the elven name of zefhar since the bows shape formed that rune. Milva had used zefhars for several years and couldnt imagine a bow capable of outclassing them.
But she had finally come across one. It was of course at the Seaside Bazaar in Cidaris which was renowned for its diverse selection of strange and rare goods brought by sailors from the most distant corners of the world; from anywhere a frigate or galleon could reach. Whenever she could Milva would visit the bazaar and look at the foreign bows. It was there she bought the bow shed thought would serve her for many years. She had thought the zefhar from Zerrikania reinforced with polished antelope horn was perfect. For just a year. Twelve months later at the same market stall owned by the same trader she had found another rare beauty.
The bow came from the Far North. It measured just over five feet was made of mahogany had a perfectly balanced riser and flat laminated limbs glued together from alternating layers of fine wood boiled sinew and whalebone. It differed from the other composite bows in its construction and also in its price; which is what had initially caught Milvas attention. When however she picked up the bow and flexed it she paid the price the trader was asking without hesitation or haggling. Four hundred Novigrad crowns. Naturally she didnt have such a titanic sum on her; instead she had given up her Zerrikanian zefhar a bunch of sable pelts a small exquisite elven-made medallion and a coral cameo pendant on a string of river pearls.
But she didnt regret it. Not ever. The bow was incredibly light and quite simply perfectly accurate. Although it wasnt long it had an impressive kick to its laminated wood and sinew limbs. Equipped with a silk and hemp bowstring stretched between its precisely curved limbs it generated fifty-five pounds of force from a twenty-four-inch draw. True enough there were bows that could generate eighty but Milva considered that excessive. An arrow shot from her whalebone fifty-fiver covered a distance of two hundred feet in two heartbeats and at a hundred paces still had enough force to impale a stag while it would pass right through an unarmoured human. Milva rarely hunted animals larger than red deer or heavily armoured men.
The butterfly flew away. The chaffinches continued to make a racket in the undergrowth. And still nothing crossed her line of sight. Milva leant against the trunk of a pine and began to think back. Simply to kill time.
Her first encounter with the Witcher had taken place in July two weeks after the events on the Isle of Thanedd and the outbreak of war in Dol Angra. Milva had returned to Brokilon after a fortnights absence; she was leading the remains of a Scoiatael commando defeated in Temeria during an attempt to make their way into war-torn Aedirn. The Squirrels had wanted to join the uprising incited by the elves in Dol Blathanna. They had failed and would have perished had it not been for Milva. But theyd found her and refuge in Brokilon.
Immediately on her arrival she had been informed that Aglaïs needed her urgently in Col Serrai. Milva had been a little taken aback. Aglaïs was the leader of the Brokilon healers and the deep valley of Col Serrai with its hot springs and caves was where healings usually took place.
She responded to the call convinced it concerned some elf who had been healed and needed her help to re-establish contact with his commando. But when she saw the wounded witcher and learned what it was about she was absolutely furious. She ran from the cave with her hair streaming behind her and offloaded all her anger on Aglaïs.
He saw me! He saw my face! Do you understand what danger that puts me in?
No no I dont understand replied the healer coldly. That is Gwynbleidd the Witcher a friend of Brokilon. He has been here for a fortnight since the new moon. And more time will pass before he will be able to get up and walk normally. He craves tidings from the world; news about those close to him. Only you can supply him with that.
Tidings from the world? Have you lost your mind dryad? Do you know what is happening in the world now beyond the borders of your tranquil forest? A war is raging in Aedirn! Brugge Temeria and Redania are reduced to havoc hell and much slaughter! Those who instigated the rebellion on Thanedd are being hunted high and low! There are spies and angivare–informers–everywhere; its sometimes sufficient to let slip a single word make a face at the wrong moment and youll meet the hangmans red-hot iron in the dungeon! And you want me to creep around spying asking questions gathering information? Risking my neck? And for whom? For some half-dead witcher? And who is he to me? My own flesh and blood? Youve truly taken leave of your senses Aglaïs.
If youre going to shout interrupted the dryad calmly lets go deeper into the forest. He needs peace and quiet.
Despite herself Milva looked over at the cave where she had seen the wounded witcher a moment earlier. A strapping lad she had thought thin yet sinewy… His hairs white but his bellys as flat as a young mans; hard times have been his companion not lard and beer…
He was on Thanedd she stated; she didnt ask. Hes a rebel.
I know not said Aglaïs shrugging. Hes wounded. He needs help. Im not interested in the rest.
Milva was annoyed. The healer was known for her taciturnity. But Milva had already heard excited accounts from dryads in the eastern marches of Brokilon; she already knew the details of the events that had occurred a fortnight earlier. About the chestnut-haired sorceress who had appeared in Brokilon in a burst of magic; about the cripple with a broken arm and leg she had been dragging with her. A cripple who had turned out to be the Witcher known to the dryads as Gwynbleidd: the White Wolf.
At first according to the dryads no one had known what steps to take. The mutilated witcher screamed and fainted by turns Aglaïs had applied makeshift dressings the sorceress cursed and wept. Milva did not believe that at all: who has ever seen a sorceress weep? And later the order came from Duén Canell from the silver-eyed Eithné the Lady of Brokilon. Send the sorceress away said the ruler of the Forest of the Dryads. And tend to the Witcher.
And so they did. Milva had seen as much. He was lying in a cave in a hollow full of water from the magical Brokilon springs. His limbs which had been held in place using splints and put in traction were swathed in a thick layer of the healing climbing plant–conynhaela–and turfs of knitbone. His hair was as white as milk. Unusually he was conscious: anyone being treated with conynhaela normally lay lifeless and raving as the magic spoke through them…
Well? the healers emotionless voice tore her from her reverie. What is it going to be? What am I to tell him?
To go to hell snapped Milva lifting her belt from which hung a heavy purse and a hunting knife. And you can go to hell too Aglaïs.
As you wish. I shall not compel you.
You are right. You will not.
She went into the forest among the sparse pines and didnt look back. She was angry.
Milva knew about the events which had taken place during the first July new moon on the Isle of Thanedd; the Scoiatael talked about it endlessly. There had been a rebellion during the Mages Conclave on the island. Blood had been spilt and heads had rolled. And as if on a signal the armies of Nilfgaard had attacked Aedirn and Lyria and the war had begun. And in Temeria Redania and Kaedwen it was all blamed on the Squirrels. For one thing because a commando of Scoiatael had supposedly come to the aid of the rebellious mages on Thanedd. For another because an elf or possibly half-elf had supposedly stabbed and killed Vizimir King of Redania. So the furious humans had gone after the Squirrels with a vengeance. The fighting was raging everywhere and elven blood was flowing in rivers…
Ha thought Milva perhaps what the priests are saying is true after all and the end of the world and the day of judgement are close at hand? The world is in flames humans are preying not only on elves but on other humans too. Brothers are raising knives against brothers… And the Witcher is meddling in politics… and joining the rebellion. The Witcher who is meant to roam the world and kill monsters eager to harm humans! No witcher for as long as anyone can remember has ever allowed himself to be drawn into politics or war. Why theres even the tale about a foolish king who carried water in a sieve took a hare as a messenger and appointed a witcher as a palatine. And yet here we have the Witcher carved up in a rebellion against the kings and forced to escape punishment in Brokilon. Perhaps it truly is the end of the world!
Greetings Maria.
She started. The short dryad leaning against a pine had eyes and hair the colour of silver. The setting sun gave her head a halo against the background of the motley wall of trees. Milva dropped to one knee and bowed low.
My greetings to you Lady Eithné.
The ruler of Brokilon stuck a small crescent-shaped golden knife into a bast girdle.
Arise she said. Let us take a walk. I wish to talk with you.
They walked for a long time through the shadowy forest; the delicate silver-haired dryad and the tall flaxen-haired girl. Neither of them broke the silence for some time.
It is long since you were at Duén Canell Maria.
There was no time Lady Eithné. It is a long road to Duén Canell from the River Ribbon and I… But of course you know.
That I do. Are you weary?
The elves need my help. Im helping them on your orders after all.
At my request.
Indeed. At your request.
And I have one more.
As I thought. The Witcher?
Help him.
Milva stopped and turned back breaking an overhanging twig of honeysuckle with a sharp movement turning it over in her fingers before flinging it to the ground.
For half a year she said softly looking into the dryads silvery eyes I have risked my life guiding elves from their decimated commandos to Brokilon… When they are rested and their wounds healed I lead them out again… Is that so little? Havent I done enough? Every new moon I set out on the trail in the dark of the night. Ive begun to fear the sun as much as a bat or an owl does…
No one knows the forest trails better than you.
I will not learn anything in the greenwood. I hear that the Witcher wants me to gather news by moving among humans. Hes a rebel the ears of the angivare prick up at the sound of his name. I must be careful not to show myself in the cities. And what if someone recognises me? The memories still endure the blood is not yet dry… for there was a lot of blood Lady Eithné.
A great deal. The silver eyes of the old dryad were alien cold; inscrutable. A great deal indeed.
Were they to recognise me they would impale me.
You are prudent. You are cautious and vigilant.
In order to gather the tidings the Witcher requests it is necessary to shed vigilance. It is necessary to ask. And now it is dangerous to demonstrate curiosity. Were they to capture me—
You have contacts.
They would torture me. Until I died. Or grind me down in Drakenborg—
But you are indebted to me.
Milva turned her head away and bit her lip.
Its true I am she said bitterly. I have not forgotten.
She narrowed her eyes her face suddenly contorted and she clenched her teeth tightly. The memory shone faintly beneath her eyelids; the ghastly moonlight of that night. The pain in her ankle suddenly returned held tight by the leather snare and the pain in her joints after they had been cruelly wrenched. She heard again the soughing of leaves as the tree shot suddenly upright… Her screaming moaning; the desperate frantic horrified struggle and the invasive sense of fear which flowed over her when she realised she couldnt free herself… The cry and fear the creak of the rope the rippling shadows; the swinging unnatural upturned earth upturned sky trees with upturned tops pain blood pounding in her temples…
And at dawn the dryads all around her in a ring… The distant silvery laughter… A puppet on a string! Swing swing marionette little head hanging down… And her own unnatural wheezing cry. And then darkness.
Indeed I have a debt she said through clenched teeth. Indeed for I was a hanged man cut from the noose. As long as I live I see I shall never pay off that debt.
Everyone has some kind of debt replied Eithné. Such is life Maria Barring. Debts and liabilities obligations gratitude payments… Doing something for someone. Or perhaps for ourselves? For in fact we are always paying ourselves back and not someone else. Each time we are indebted we pay off the debt to ourselves. In each of us lies a creditor and a debtor at once and the art is for the reckoning to tally inside us. We enter the world as a minute part of the life we are given and from then on we are ever paying off debts. To ourselves. For ourselves. In order for the final reckoning to tally.
Is this human dear to your Lady Eithné? That… that witcher?
He is. Although he knows not of it. Return to Col Serrai Maria Barring. Go to him. And do what he asks of you.
In the valley the brushwood crunched and a twig snapped. A magpie gave a noisy angry chacker-chacker and some chaffinches took flight flashing their white wing bars and tail feathers. Milva held her breath. At last.
Chacker-chacker called the magpie. Chacker-chacker-chacker. Another twig cracked.
Milva adjusted the worn polished leather guard on her left forearm and placed her hand through the loop attached to her gear. She took an arrow from the flat quiver on her thigh. Out of habit she checked the arrowhead and the fletchings. She bought shafts at the market–choosing on average one out of every dozen offered to her–but she always fletched them herself. Most ready-made arrows in circulation had too-short fletchings arranged straight along the shaft while Milva only used spirally fletched arrows with the fletchings never shorter than five inches.
She nocked the arrow and stared at the mouth of the ravine at a green spot of barberry among the trees heavy with bunches of red berries.
The chaffinches had not flown far and began their trilling again. Come on little one thought Milva raising the bow and drawing the bowstring. Come on. Im ready.
But the roe deer headed along the ravine towards the marsh and springs which fed the small streams flowing into the Ribbon. A young buck came out of the ravine. A fine specimen weighing in–she estimated–at almost four stone. He lifted his head pricked up his ears and then turned back towards the bushes nibbling leaves.
With his back toward her he was an easy victim. Had it not been for a tree trunk obscuring part of the target Milva would have fired without a second thought. Even if she were to hit him in the belly the arrow would penetrate and pierce the heart liver or lungs. Were she to hit him in the haunch she would destroy an artery and the animal would be sure to fall in a short time. She waited without releasing the bowstring.
The buck raised his head again stepped out from behind the trunk and abruptly turned round a little. Milva holding the bow at full draw cursed under her breath. A shot face-on was uncertain; instead of hitting the lung the arrowhead might enter the stomach. She waited holding her breath aware of the salty taste of the bowstring against the corner of her mouth. That was one of the most important quite invaluable advantages of her bow; were she to use a heavier or inferior weapon she would never be able to hold it fully drawn for so long without tiring or losing precision with the shot.
Fortunately the buck lowered his head nibbled on some grass protruding from the moss and turned to stand sideways. Milva exhaled calmly took aim at his chest and gently released her fingers from the bowstring.
She didnt hear the expected crunch of ribs being broken by the arrow however. For the buck leapt upwards kicked and fled accompanied by the crackling of dry branches and the rustle of leaves being shoved aside.
Milva stood motionless for several heartbeats petrified like a marble statue of a forest goddess. Only when all the noises had subsided did she lift her hand from her cheek and lower the bow. Having made a mental note of the route the animal had taken as it fled she sat down calmly resting her back against a tree trunk. She was an experienced hunter she had poached in the lords forests from a child. She had brought down her first roe deer at the age of eleven and her first fourteen-point buck on the day of her fourteenth birthday–an exceptionally favourable augury. And experience had taught that one should never rush after a shot animal. If she had aimed well the buck would fall no further than two hundred paces from the mouth of the ravine. Should she have been off target–a possibility she actually didnt contemplate–hurrying might only make things worse. A badly injured animal which wasnt agitated would slow to a walk after its initial panicked flight. A frightened animal being pursued would race away at breakneck speed and would only slow down once it was over the hills and far away.
So she had at least half an hour. She plucked a blade of grass stuck it between her teeth and drifted off in thought once again. The memories came back.
When she returned to Brokilon twelve days later the Witcher was already up and about. He was limping somewhat and slightly dragging one hip but he was walking. Milva was not surprised–she knew of the miraculous healing properties of the forest water and the herb conynhaela. She also knew Aglaïss abilities and on several occasions had witnessed the astonishingly quick return to health of wounded dryads. And the rumours about the exceptional resistance and endurance of witchers were also clearly no mere myths either.
She did not go to Col Serrai immediately on her arrival although the dryads hinted that Gwynbleidd had been impatiently awaiting her return. She delayed intentionally still unhappy with her mission and wanting to make her feelings clear. She escorted the Squirrels back to their camp. She gave a lengthy account of the incidents on the road and warned the dryads about the plans to seal the border on the Ribbon by humans. Only when she was rebuked for the third time did Milva bathe change and go to the Witcher.
He was waiting for her at the edge of a glade by some cedars. He was walking up and down squatting from time to time and then straightening up with a spring. Aglaïs had clearly ordered him to exercise.
What news? he asked immediately after greeting her. The coldness in his voice didnt deceive her.
The war seems to be coming to an end she answered shrugging. Nilfgaard they say has crushed Lyria and Aedirn. Verden has surrendered and the King of Temeria has struck a deal with the Nilfgaardian emperor. The elves in the Valley of Flowers have established their own kingdom but the Scoiatael from Temeria and Redania have not joined them. They are still fighting…
That isnt what I meant.
No? she said feigning surprise. Oh I see. Well I stopped in Dorian as you asked though it meant going considerably out of my way. And the highways are so dangerous now…
She broke off stretching. This time he didnt hurry her.
Was Codringher she finally asked whom you asked me to visit a close friend of yours?
The Witchers face did not twitch but Milva knew he understood at once.
No. He wasnt.
Thats good she continued easily. Because hes no longer with us. He went up in flames along with his chambers; probably only the chimney and half of the façade survived. The whole of Dorian is abuzz with rumours. Some say Codringher was dabbling in black magic and concocting poisons; that he had a pact with the devil so the devils fire consumed him. Others say hed stuck his nose and his fingers into a crack he shouldnt have as was his custom. And it wasnt to somebodys liking so they bumped him off and set everything alight to cover their tracks. What do you think?
She didnt receive a reply or detect any emotion on his ashen face. So she continued in the same venomous arrogant tone of voice.
Its interesting that the fire and Codringhers death occurred during the first July new moon exactly when the unrest on the Isle of Thanedd was taking place. As if someone had guessed that Codringher knew something about the disturbances and would be asked for details. As if someone wanted to stop his trap up good and proper in advance strike him dumb. What do you say to that? Ah I see you wont say anything. Youre keeping quiet so Ill tell you this: your activities are dangerous and so is your spying and questioning. Perhaps someone will want to shut other traps and ears than Codringhers. Thats what I think.
Forgive me he said a moment later. Youre right. I put you at risk. It was too dangerous a task for a—
For a woman you mean? she said jerking her head back flicking her still wet hair from her shoulder with a sudden movement. Is that what you were going to say? Are you playing the gentleman all of a sudden? I may have to squat to piss but my coat is lined with wolf skin not coney fur! Dont call me a coward because you dont know me!
I do he said in a calm quiet voice not reacting to her anger or raised voice. You are Milva. You lead Squirrels to safety in Brokilon avoiding capture. Your courage is known to me. But I recklessly and selfishly put you at risk—
Youre a fool! she interrupted sharply. Worry about yourself not about me. Worry about that young girl!
She smiled disdainfully. Because this time his face did change. She fell silent deliberately waiting for further questions.
What do you know? he finally asked. And from whom?
You had your Codringher she snorted lifting her head proudly. And I have my own contacts. The kind with sharp eyes and ears.
Tell me Milva. Please.
After the fighting on Thanedd she began after waiting a moment unrest erupted everywhere. The hunt for traitors began particularly for any sorcerers who supported Nilfgaard and for the other turncoats. Some were captured others vanished without trace. You dont need much nous to guess where they fled to and under whose wings theyre hiding. But it wasnt just sorcerers and traitors who were hunted. A Squirrel commando led by the famous Faoiltiarna also helped the mutinous sorcerers in the rebellion on Thanedd. So now hes wanted. An order has been issued that every elf captured should be tortured and interrogated about Faoiltiarnas commando.
Whos Faoiltiarna?
An elf one of the Scoiatael. Few have got under the humans skin the way he has. Theres a hefty bounty on his head. But theyre seeking another too. A Nilfgaardian knight who was on Thanedd. And also for a…
Go on.
The angivare are asking about a witcher who goes by the name of Geralt of Rivia. And about a girl named Cirilla. Those two are to be captured alive. It was ordered on pain of death: if either of you is caught not a hair on your heads is to be harmed not a button may be torn from her dress. Oh! You must be dear to their hearts for them to care so much about your health…
She broke off seeing the expression on his face from which his unnatural composure had abruptly disappeared. She realised that however hard she tried she was unable to make him afraid. At least not for his own skin. She unexpectedly felt ashamed.
Well that pursuit of theirs is futile she said gently with just a faintly mocking smile on her lips. You are safe in Brokilon. And they wont catch the girl alive either. When they searched through the rubble on Thanedd all the debris from that magical tower which collapsed—Hey whats wrong with you?
The Witcher staggered leant against a cedar and sat down heavily near the trunk. Milva leapt back horrified by the pallor which his already whitened face had suddenly taken on.
Aglaïs! Sirssa! Fauve! Come quickly! Damn I think hes about to keel over! Hey you!
Dont call them… Theres nothing wrong with me. Speak. I want to know…
Milva suddenly understood.
They found nothing in the debris! she cried feeling herself go pale too. Nothing! Although they examined every stone and cast spells they didnt find…
She wiped the sweat from her forehead and held back with a gesture the dryads running towards them. She seized the Witcher by his shoulders and leant over him so that her long hair tumbled over his pale face.
You misunderstood me she said quickly incoherently; it was difficult to find the right words among the mass which were trying to tumble out. I only meant—You understood me wrongly. Because I… How was I to know she is so… No… I didnt mean to. I only wanted to say that the girl… That they wont find her because she disappeared without a trace like those mages. Forgive me.
He didnt answer. He looked away. Milva bit her lip and clenched her fists.
Im leaving Brokilon again in three days she said gently after a long very long silence. The moon must wane a little and the nights become a little darker. I shall return within ten days perhaps sooner. Shortly after Lammas in the first days of August. Worry not. I shall move earth and water but I shall find out everything. If anyone knows anything about that maiden youll know it too.
Thank you Milva.
Ill see you in ten days… Gwynbleidd.
Call me Geralt he said holding out a hand. She took it without a second thought. And squeezed it very hard.
And Im Maria Barring.
A nod of the head and the flicker of a smile thanked her for her sincerity. She knew he appreciated it.
Be careful please. When you ask questions be careful who you ask.
Dont worry about me.
Your informers… Do you trust them?
I dont trust anyone.
The Witcher is in Brokilon. Among the dryads.
As I thought Dijkstra said folding his arms on his chest. But Im glad its been confirmed.
He remained silent for a moment. Lennep licked his lips. And waited.
Im glad its been confirmed repeated the head of the secret service of the Kingdom of Redania pensively as though he were talking to himself. Its always better to be certain. If only Yennefer were with him… There isnt a witch with him is there Lennep?
I beg your pardon? the spy started. No Your Lordship. There isnt. What are your orders? If you want him alive Ill lure him out of Brokilon. But if youd prefer him dead…
Lennep said Dijkstra raising his cold pale blue eyes towards the agent. Dont be overzealous. In our trade officiousness never pays and should always be viewed with suspicion.
Sire said Lennep blanching somewhat. I only—
I know. You only asked about my orders. Well here they are: leave the Witcher alone.
Yes sire. And what about Milva?
Leave her alone too. For now.
Yes sire. May I go?
You may.
The agent left cautiously and silently closing the oak door behind him. Dijkstra remained silent for a long time staring at the towering pile of maps letters denunciations interrogation reports and death sentences in front of him.
Ori.
The secretary raised his head and cleared his throat. He said nothing.
The Witcher is in Brokilon.
Ori Reuven cleared his throat again involuntarily glancing under the table towards his bosss leg. Dijkstra noticed the look.
Thats right. I wont let him get away with that he barked. I couldnt walk for two weeks because of him. I lost face with Philippa forced to whimper like a dog and beg her for a bloody spell otherwise Id still be hobbling. I cant blame anyone but myself; I underestimated him. But the worst thing is that I cant get my own back and tan his witchers hide! I dont have the time and anyway I cant use my own men to settle private scores! Thats right isnt it Ori?
Ahem…
Dont grunt at me. I know. But hell power tempts! How it beguiles invites to be made use of! How easy it is to forget when one has it! But if you forget once theres no end to it… Is Philippa Eilhart still in Montecalvo?
Yes.
Take a quill and an inkwell. Ill dictate a letter to her. I shall begin… Damn it I cant concentrate. Whats that bloody racket Ori? Whats happening in the square?
Some students are throwing stones at the Nilfgaardian envoys residence. We paid them to do so hem hem if Im not mistaken.
Oh. Very well. Close the window. And have the lads throw stones at the dwarf Giancardis bank tomorrow. He refused to reveal the details of some accounts.
Giancardi hem hem donated a considerable sum of money to the military fund.
Ha. Then have them throw stones at the banks that didnt donate.
They all did.
Oh youre boring me Ori. Write I said. Darling Phil the sun of my… Blast I keep forgetting. Take a new sheet of paper. Ready?
Of course hem hem.
Dear Philippa. Mistress Triss Merigold is sure to be worried about the witcher she teleported from Thanedd to Brokilon which she kept so secret that even I didnt know anything. It hurt me terribly. Please reassure her: the Witcher is doing well now. He has even begun to send female emissaries from Brokilon to search for traces of Princess Cirilla the young girl youre so interested in. Our good friend Geralt clearly doesnt know Cirilla is in Nilfgaard where shes preparing for her wedding to Imperator Emhyr. Its important to me that the Witcher lies low in Brokilon which is why Ill do my best to ensure the news reaches him. Have you got that?
Hem hem… the news reaches him.
New paragraph! It puzzles me… Ori wipe the bloody quill! Were writing to Philippa not to the royal council. The letter must look neat! New paragraph. It puzzles me why the Witcher hasnt tried to make contact with Yennefer. I refuse to believe that his passion which was verging on obsession has petered out so suddenly irrespective of learning his darlings political objectives. On the other hand if Yennefer is the one who handed Cirilla over to Emhyr and if theres proof of it I would gladly make sure the Witcher was furnished with it. The problem would solve itself Im certain and the faithless black-haired beauty would be on very shaky ground. The Witcher doesnt like it when anyone touches his little girl as Artaud Terranova discovered on Thanedd in no uncertain terms. I would like to think Phil that you dont have any evidence of Yennefers betrayal and you dont know where she is hiding. It would hurt me greatly to discover this is the latest secret being concealed from me. I have no secrets from you… What are you sniggering about Ori?
Oh nothing hem hem.
Write! I have no secrets from you Phil and I count on reciprocity. With my deepest respect et cetera et cetera. Give it here Ill sign it.
Ori Reuven sprinkled the letter with sand. Dijkstra made himself more comfortable interlacing his fingers over his stomach and twiddling his thumbs.
That Milva the Witchers spy he asked. What can you tell me about her?
She is engaged at present hem hem–his secretary coughed–in escorting the remnants of Scoiatael units defeated by the Temerian Army to Brokilon. She rescues elves from hunts and traps enabling them to rest and regroup into combat commandos…
Refrain from supplying me with common knowledge interrupted Dijkstra. Im familiar with Milvas activities and will eventually make use of them. Otherwise I would have sold her out to the Temerians long since. What can you tell me about Milva herself? As a person?
She comes if Im not mistaken from some godforsaken village in Upper Sodden. Her true name is Maria Barring. Milva is a nickname the dryads gave her. In the Elder Speech it means—
Red Kite interrupted Dijkstra. I know.
Her family have been hunters for generations. They are forest dwellers and feel most comfortable in the greenwood. When old Barrings son was trampled to death by an elk the old man taught his daughter the forest crafts. After he passed away her mother married again. Hem hem… Maria didnt get on with her stepfather and ran away from home. She was sixteen at the time if Im not mistaken. She headed north living from hunting but the lords gamekeepers didnt make her life easy hunting and harrying her as though she were fair game. So she began to poach in Brokilon and it was there hem hem that the dryads got hold of her.
And instead of finishing her off they took her in Dijkstra muttered. Adopted her if you will… And she repaid their kindness. She struck a pact with the Hag of Brokilon old silver-eyed Eithné. Maria Barring is dead; long live Milva… How many human expeditions had come unstuck by the time the forces in Verden and Kerack cottoned on? Three?
Hem hem… Four if Im not mistaken… Ori Reuven was always hoping he wasnt mistaken although in fact his memory was infallible. All together it was about five score humans those whod gone after dryad scalps most savagely. And it took them a long time to catch on because Milva occasionally carried someone out of the slaughter on her own back and whoever shed rescued would praise her courage to the skies. It was only after the fourth time in Verden if Im not mistaken that someone caught on. Why is it? the shout suddenly went up hem hem that the guide who bands humans together to fight the dryads always gets out in one piece? And the cat was out of the bag. The guide was leading them. But into a trap right into the shooting range of the dryads waiting in ambush…
Dijkstra slid an interrogation report to the edge of his desk because the parchment still seemed to reek of the torture chamber.
And then he concluded Milva vanished into Brokilon like the morning mist. And its still difficult to find volunteers for expeditions against the dryads in Verden. Old Eithné and young Red Kite were carrying out pretty effective purges. And they dare say that we humans invented all the dirty tricks. On the other hand…
Hem hem? coughed Ori Reuven surprised by his bosss sudden–and then continuing–silence.
On the other hand they may have finally begun to learn from us said the spy coldly looking down at the denunciations interrogation reports and death sentences.
Milva grew anxious when she couldnt see blood anywhere near where the buck had disappeared. She suddenly recalled that he had jumped just as she had fired her arrow. Had jumped or was about to; it amounted to the same thing. He had moved and the arrow might have hit him in the belly. Milva cursed. A shot to the belly was a disgrace for any hunter! Urgh the very thought of it!
She quickly ran over to the slope of the ravine looking carefully among the brambles moss and ferns. She was hunting for her arrow. It was equipped with four blades so sharp they could shave the hairs on your forearm. Fired from a distance of fifty paces the arrow must have passed right through the animal.
She searched she found it and sighed in relief then spat three times happy with her luck. She neednt have worried; it was better than she had imagined. The arrow was not covered in sticky foul-smelling stomach contents. Neither did it bear traces of bright pink frothy blood from the lungs. What covered the shaft was dark red and viscous. The arrow had gone through the heart. Milva didnt have to creep or stalk; she had been spared a long walk following the deers tracks. The buck had to be lying in the undergrowth no more than a hundred paces from the clearing in a spot that would be surely indicated by the blood. And after being shot through the heart he would have started bleeding after a few paces so she knew she would easily find the trail.
She picked it up after ten paces and followed it once again losing herself in her reverie.
She kept the promise she had given the Witcher. She returned to Brokilon five days after the Harvest Festival–five days after the new moon–which marked the beginning of the month of August for people and for elves Lammas the seventh and penultimate savaed of the year.
She crossed the Ribbon at daybreak with five elves. The commando she was leading had initially numbered nine riders but the soldiers from Brugge were following them the whole time. Three furlongs before the river they were hot on their trail pressing hard and only abandoned their efforts when they reached the Ribbon with Brokilon looming up in the dawn mists on the far bank. The soldiers were afraid of Brokilon and that alone saved the commando. They made it across. Exhausted and wounded. But not all of them.
She had news for the Witcher but thought that Gwynbleidd was still in Col Serrai. She had intended to see him around noon after a good long sleep so she was astonished when he suddenly emerged from the fog like a ghost. He sat down beside her without a word watching as she made herself a makeshift bed by spreading a blanket over a heap of branches.
Youre in a hurry Witcher she scoffed. Im ready to drop. Ive been in the saddle all day and all night my backsides numb and my trousers are soaked up to my belt for we crept our way through the wetlands at dawn like a pack of wolves…
Please. Did you learn anything?
Yes I did she snorted unlacing and pulling off her drenched clinging boots. Without much difficulty because everybodys talking about it. You never told me your young girl was such a personage! Id thought she was your stepdaughter some sort of waif and stray a star-crossed orphan. And who does she turn out to be? A Cintran princess! Well! And perhaps youre a prince in disguise?
Tell me please.
The kings wont get their hands on her now for your Cirilla it turns out fled straight from Thanedd to Nilfgaard; probably with those treacherous mages. And Imperator Emhyr received her there with all ceremony. And do you know what? Hes said to be thinking of marrying her. Now let me rest. We can talk after Ive slept if you want.
The Witcher said nothing. Milva hung her wet footwraps on a forked branch positioned so that the rising suns rays would fall on them and tugged at her belt buckle.
I want to get undressed she growled. Why are you still hanging about? You cant have expected happier news can you? Youre in no danger; no ones asking after you the spies have stopped being interested in you. And your wench has escaped from the clutches of the kings and will be declared Imperatoress…
Is that information reliable?
Nothing is certain these days she yawned sitting down on her bed apart from the fact that the sun journeys across the heavens from the east to the west. But what people are saying about the Nilfgaardian Imperator and the Princess of Cintra seems to be true. Its all anyones talking about.
Why this sudden interest?
You really dont know? Shes said to be bringing Emhyr a goodly acreage of land in her dowry! And not just Cintra but land on this side of the Yaruga too! Ha and shell be my Lady as well for Im from Upper Sodden and the whole of Sodden it turns out is her fiefdom! So if I bring down a buck in her forests and they lay hands on me I can be hung on her orders… Oh what a rotten world! And a pox on it I cant keep my eyes open…
Just one more question. Did they capture any sorceresses—I mean did they capture anyone from that pack of treacherous sorcerers?
No. But one enchantress they say took her own life. Soon after Vengerberg fell and the Kaedwen Army entered Aedirn. No doubt out of distress or fear of torture—
There were riderless horses in the commando you brought here. Would the elves give me one?
Oh in a hurry I see she muttered wrapping herself in the blanket. I think I know where youre planning to…
She fell silent astonished by the expression on his face before she realised that the news she had brought was not at all happy. She saw that she understood nothing nothing at all. Suddenly unexpectedly unawares she felt the urge to sit down by his side bombard him with questions listen to him learn more perhaps offer counsel… She urgently ground her knuckles into the corners of her eyes. Im exhausted she thought death was breathing down my neck all night. I have to rest. And anyway why should I be bothered by his sorrows and cares? What does he matter to me? And that wench? To hell with him and with her! A pox on it all this has driven the sleep from me…
The Witcher stood up.
Will the elves give me a horse? he repeated.
Take whichever you please she said a moment later. But dont let them see you. They gave us a good hiding by the ford blood was spilt… And dont touch the black; hes mine… What are you waiting for?
Thank you for your help. For everything.
She didnt answer.
Im indebted to you. How shall I pay you back?
How? By getting out of my sight! she cried raising herself on an elbow and tugging sharply at the blanket. I… I have to sleep! Take a horse… and go… To Nilfgaard to hell to all the devils. Makes no difference to me! Go away and leave me in peace!
Ill pay back what I owe he said quietly. I wont forget. It may happen that one day youll be in need of help. Or support. A shoulder to lean on. Then call out call out in the night. And Ill come.
The buck lay on the edge of the slope which was spongy from gushing springs and densely overgrown with ferns his neck contorted with a glassy eye staring up at the sky. Milva saw several large ticks bored into his light brown belly.
Youll have to find yourselves some other blood vermin she muttered rolling up her sleeves and drawing a knife. Because this is going cold.
With a swift and practised movement she slit the skin from sternum to anus adroitly running the blade around the genitalia. She cautiously separated the layer of fat up to her elbows in blood. She severed the gullet and pulled the entrails out. She cut open the stomach and gall bladder hunting for bezoars. She didnt believe in their magical qualities but there was no shortage of fools who did and would pay well for them.
She lifted the buck and laid him on a nearby log his slit belly pointing downwards letting the blood drain out. She wiped her hands on a bunch of ferns.
She sat down by her quarry.
Possessed insane Witcher she said softly staring at the crowns of the Brokilon pines looming a hundred feet above her. Youre heading for Nilfgaard to get your wench. Youre heading to the end of the world which is all in flames and you havent even thought about supplying yourself with victuals. I know you have someone to live for. But do you have anything to live on?
Naturally enough the pines didnt comment or interrupt her monologue.
I dont think Milva said using her knife to scrape the blood out from beneath her fingernails you have the slightest chance of getting your young girl back. You wont make it to the Yaruga never mind Nilfgaard. I dont think youll even make it to Sodden. I think youre fated to die. Its written on your fierce face its staring through your hideous eyes. Death will catch up with you O mad Witcher itll catch up with you soon. But thanks to this little buck at least it wont be death by starvation. It may not be much but its something. Thats what I think.
Dijkstra sighed to himself at the sight of the Nilfgaardian ambassador entering the audience chamber. Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen Imperator Emhyr var Emreiss envoy was accustomed to conducting conversations in diplomatic language and adored larding his sentences with pompous linguistic oddities comprehensible only to diplomats and scholars. Dijkstra had studied at the Academy of Oxenfurt and although he had not been awarded the title of Master of Letters he knew the basics of bombastic scholarly jargon. However he was reluctant to use it since he hated with a vengeance pomposity and all forms of pretentious ceremony.
Greetings Your Excellency.
Your Lordship Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen said bowing ceremoniously. Ah please forgive me. Perhaps I ought to say: Your Grace the Duke? Your Highness the Regent? Secretary of State? Pon my word offices are falling on you like hailstones such that I really dont know how to address you so as not to breach protocol.
 Your Majesty would be best Dijkstra replied modestly. You are aware after all Your Excellency that the king is judged by his court. And you are probably aware that when I shout: Jump! the court in Tretogor asks: How high? 
The ambassador knew that Dijkstra was exaggerating but not inordinately. Prince Radovid was still a minor Queen Hedwig distraught by her husbands tragic death and the aristocracy intimidated stupefied at variance and divided into factions. Dijkstra was the de facto governor of Redania and could have taken any rank he pleased with no difficulty. But Dijkstra had no desire to do so.
Your Lordship deigned to summon me the ambassador said a moment later. Passing over the Foreign Minister. To what do I owe this honour?
The minister Dijkstra said looking up at the ceiling resigned from the post owing to his poor state of health.
The ambassador nodded gravely. He knew perfectly well that the Foreign Minister was languishing in a dungeon and being a coward and a fool had doubtless told Dijkstra everything about his collusion with the Nilfgaardian secret service during the demonstration of torture instruments preceding his interrogation. He knew that the network established by Vattier de Rideaux head of the imperial secret service had been crushed and all its threads were in Dijkstras hands. He also knew that those threads led directly to his person. But his person was protected by immunity and protocol forced them to play this game to the bitter end. Particularly following the curious encoded instructions recently sent to the embassy by Vattier and Coroner Stephan Skellen the imperial agent for special affairs.
Since his successor has not yet been named Dijkstra continued it is my unpleasant duty to inform you that Your Excellency is now deemed persona non grata in the Kingdom of Redania.
The ambassador bowed.
I regret he said that the distrust that resulted in the mutual recall of ambassadors are the consequence of matters which after all directly concern neither the Kingdom of Redania nor the Nilfgaardian Empire. The Empire has not undertaken any hostile measures against Redania.
Apart from a blockade against our ships and goods at the mouth of the Yaruga and the Skellige Islands. And apart from arming and supporting gangs of Scoiatael.
Those are insinuations.
And the concentration of imperial forces in Verden and Cintra? The raids on Sodden and Brugge by armed gangs? Sodden and Brugge are under Temerian protection; we in turn are in alliance with Temeria Your Excellency which makes an attack on Temeria an attack on us. In addition there are matters which directly concern Redania: the rebellion on the Isle of Thanedd and the criminal assassination of King Vizimir. And the question of the role the Empire played in those incidents.
Quod attinet the incident on Thanedd the ambassador said spreading his arms I have not been empowered to express an opinion. His Imperial Highness Emhyr var Emreis is unaware of the substance of the private feuds of your mages. I regret the fact that our protests are achieving minimal success in the face of the propaganda which seeks to suggest something else. Propaganda disseminated I dare say not without the support of the highest authorities of the Kingdom of Redania.
Your protests greatly astonish and surprise me Dijkstra said smiling faintly. Since the Imperator in no way conceals the presence of the Cintran princess at his court after she was abducted from the very same Thanedd.
Cirilla Queen of Cintra Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen corrected him with emphasis was not abducted but sought asylum in the Empire. That has nothing to do with the incident on Thanedd.
Indeed?
The incident on Thanedd the ambassador continued his countenance stony aroused the Imperators horror. And the murderous attack on the life of King Vizimir carried out by a madman evoked his sincere and intense abomination. However the vile rumour being disseminated among the common people is an even greater abomination which dares to search for the instigators of these crimes in the Empire.
The capture of the actual instigators Dijkstra said slowly will put an end to the rumours one would hope. And their capture and the meting out of justice to them is purely a matter of time.
Justitia fundamentum regnorum admitted Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen gravely. And crimen horribilis non potest non esse punibile. I affirm that His Imperial Majesty also wishes this to happen.
The Imperator has it in his power to fulfil that wish Dijkstra threw in casually folding his arms. One of the leaders of the conspiracy Enid an Gleanna until recently the sorceress Francesca Findabair is playing at being queen of the elven puppet state in Dol Blathanna by the imperial grace.
His Imperial Majesty said the ambassador bowing stiffly cannot interfere in the doings of Dol Blathanna recognised by all its neighbouring powers as an independent kingdom.
But not by Redania. For Redania Dol Blathanna remains part of the Kingdom of Aedirn. Although together with the elves and Kaedwen you have dismantled Aedirn–although not a stone remains of Lyria–you are striking those kingdoms too swiftly from the map of the world. Its too soon Your Excellency. However this is neither the time nor the place to discuss it. Let Francesca Findabair play at reigning for now; shell get her comeuppance. And what of the other rebels and King Vizimirs assassins? What about Vilgefortz of Roggeveen what about Yennefer of Vengerberg? There are grounds to believe they both fled to Nilfgaard following the collapse of the rebellion.
I assure you that is not so said the ambassador raising his head. But were it true they would not escape punishment.
They did not wrong you thus their punishment does not rest with you. Imperator Emhyr would prove his sincere desire for justice which after all is fundamentum regnorum by handing the criminals over to us.
One may not deny the validity of your request admitted Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen feigning an embarrassed smile. However primo those individuals are not in the Empire. And secundo had they even reached it there exists an impediment. Extradition is carried out on the basis of a judgment of the law each case decided upon by the Imperial Council. Bear in mind Your Lordship that the breaking of diplomatic ties by Redania is a hostile act; it would be difficult to expect the Council to vote in favour of the extradition of persons seeking asylum were a hostile country to demand that extradition. It would be an unprecedented matter… Unless…
Unless what?
A precedent were established.
I do not understand.
Were the Kingdom of Redania prepared to hand one of his subjects to the Imperator a common criminal who had been captured here the Imperator and his Council would have grounds to reciprocate this gesture of good will.
Dijkstra said nothing for a long time giving the impression he was either dozing or thinking.
Whom do you have in mind?
The name of the criminal… said the ambassador pretending to recall it. He finally searched for a document in his saffian portfolio. Forgive me memoria fragilis est. Here it is. A certain Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach. Serious gravamina weigh on him. He is being sought for murder desertion raptus puellae rape theft and forging documents. Fleeing from the Imperators wrath he escaped abroad.
To Redania? He chose a long route.
Your Lordship said Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen smiling faintly does not limit his interests only to Redania after all. There is not a shadow of doubt in my mind that were the criminal to be seized in any of the allied kingdoms Your Lordship would hear of it from the reports of numerous… friends.
What did you say the name of the felon was?
Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach.
Dijkstra fell silent again pretending to be searching in his memory.
No he said finally. No one of that name has been apprehended.
Indeed?
Regrettably my memoria is not fragilis in such cases Your Excellency.
I regret it too Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen responded icily. Particularly since the mutual extradition of criminals seems to be impossible to carry out in such circumstances. I shall not weary Your Lordship any longer. I wish you good health and good fortune.
Likewise. Farewell Your Excellency.
The ambassador left after several elaborate ceremonial bows.
You can kiss sempiternum meam you sly old devil Dijkstra muttered folding his arms. Ori!
His secretary red in the face from suppressing his cough emerged from behind a curtain.
Is Philippa still in Montecalvo?
Yes hem hem. Mistresses Laux-Antille Merigold and Metz are with her.
War may break out in a day or two the border on the Yaruga will soon go up in flames and theyve hidden themselves in some godforsaken castle! Take a quill and write. Darling Phil… Oh bugger!
Ive written: Dear Philippa.
Good. Continue. It may interest you that the freak in the plumed helmet who disappeared from Thanedd as mysteriously as he appeared is called Cahir Mawr Dyffryn and is the son of Seneschal Ceallach. This strange individual is being sought not only by us but also it would appear by the secret service of Vattier de Rideaux and the men of that son-of-a-bitch…
Mistress Philippa hem hem does not like expressions of that kind. I have written: that scoundrel.
Let it be: that scoundrel Stephan Skellen. You know as well as I do dear Phil that the imperial secret service is urgently hunting only those agents and emissaries who got under Emhyrs skin. Those who instead of carrying out their orders or dying betrayed him and their orders alike. The case thus appears quite curious since we were certain that this Cahirs orders concerned the capture of Princess Cirilla and her delivery to Nilfgaard.
New paragraph: I would like to discuss in person the strange but well-founded suspicions this matter has evoked in me and the somewhat astonishing but reasonable theories I have arrived at. With my deepest respect et cetera et cetera.
Milva rode south as the crow flies first along the banks of the Ribbon through Burn Stump and then having crossed the river through marshy gorges covered in a soft bright green carpet of hair-cap moss. She guessed that the Witcher not knowing the terrain as well as she did would not risk crossing onto the human-controlled bank. Taking a short cut across a huge bend in the river which curved towards Brokilon there was a chance she might catch up with him in the region of the Ceann Treise Falls. Were she to ride hard and not take a break she even stood a chance of overtaking him.
The chirruping chaffinches hadnt been mistaken. The sky had clouded over considerably to the south. The air had become dense and heavy and the mosquitoes and horseflies extremely annoying.
When she rode into the wetlands thick with hazel hung with still-green nuts and leafless blackish buckthorn she felt a presence. She didnt hear it. She felt it. And so she knew it must be elves.
She reined in her horse so the bowmen concealed in the undergrowth could have a good look at her. She also held her breath. In the hope that she hadnt happened upon quick-tempered ones.
A fly buzzed over the buck which was slung over the horses rump.
A rustling. A soft whistling. She whistled back. The Scoiatael emerged from the brush soundlessly and only then did Milva breathe freely again. She knew them. They belonged to Coinneach Dá Reos commando.
Hael she said dismounting. Quess va?
Ness an elf whose name she couldnt recall replied coldly. Caemm.
Other elves were encamped in the nearby clearing. There were at least thirty of them more than there should be in Coinneachs commando. This surprised Milva; in recent times Squirrel units were more likely to shrink than grow in size. In recent times commandos had become groups of bloodied nervy ragamuffins who could barely stand or stay upright in the saddle. This commando was different.
Cead Coinneach she greeted the approaching commander.
Ceadmil sorca.
Sorca. Little sister. Its how she was addressed by those she was friendly with when they wanted to express their respect and affection. And that they were indeed many many more winters older than she. At first she had only been Dhoine–human–to the elves. Later when she had begun helping them regularly they called her Aen Woedbeanna woman of the forest. Still later when they knew her better they called her–following the dryads example–Milva or Red Kite. Her real name which she only revealed to those she was closest to responding to similar gestures received from them didnt suit the elves–they pronounced it Mearya with a hint of a grimace as though in their speech it carried negative connotations. Then they would immediately switch to sorca.
Where are you headed? asked Milva looking around more intently but still not seeing any wounded or ill elves. To Eight-Mile? To Brokilon?
No.
She refrained from further questions; she knew them too well. It was enough to glance several times at their motionless hardened faces at the exaggerated pointed calm with which they were preparing their tackle and weapons. One close look into their deep fathomless eyes was enough. She knew they were going into battle.
To the south the sky was darkening becoming overcast.
And where are you headed sorca? asked Coinneach then quickly glanced at the buck slung over her horse and smiled faintly.
South she said coldly putting him right. Towards Drieschot.
The elf stopped smiling.
Along the human bank?
At least as far as Ceann Treise she said shrugging. When I reach the falls Ill definitely go back over to the Brokilon side because…
She turned around hearing the snorting of horses. Fresh Scoiatael were joining the already unusually large commando. Milva knew these new ones even better.
Ciaran! she shouted softly without attempting to hide her astonishment. Toruviel! What are you doing here? Ive only just led you to Brokilon and youre already—
Esscreasa sorca Ciaran aep Dearbh said gravely. The bandage swathed around his head was stained with oozing blood.
We have no choice Toruviel repeated. She dismounted cautiously using one arm in order to protect the other one which was still bent in a sling. News has come. We may not remain in Brokilon when every bow counts.
If I had known Milva said pouting I wouldnt have bothered. I wouldnt have risked my neck at the ford.
News came last night explained Toruviel quietly. We could not… We cannot leave our comrades in arms at a time like this. We cannot. Understand that sorca.
The sky had darkened even more. This time Milva clearly heard thunder in the distance.
Dont ride south sorca Coinneach Dá Reo pleaded. Theres a storm coming.
What can a storm do to…? She broke off and looked at him intently. Ah! So that kind of tidings have reached you have they? Its Nilfgaard is it? They are crossing the Yaruga in Sodden? They are striking Brugge? And thats why youre marching?
He did not answer.
Yes just like it was in Dol Angra she said looking into his dark eyes. Once again the Nilfgaardian Imperator has you sowing mayhem with fire and sword on the humans rear lines. And then he will make peace with the kings and they will slaughter you all. You will burn in the very fire you are starting.
Fire purges. And hardens. It must be passed through. Aenyellhael ellea sorca? In your tongue: a baptism of fire.
I prefer another kind of fire Milva said untying the buck and throwing it down onto the ground at the feet of the elves. The kind that crackles under the spit. Have it so you wont fall from hunger on the march. Its of no use to me now.
Arent you riding south?
I am.
Im going south she thought and quickly. I have to warn that fool of a witcher I have to warn him about what kind of a turmoil hes getting himself into. I have to make him turn back.
Dont go sorca.
Give me a break Coinneach.
A storm is coming from the south the elf repeated. A great tempest is coming. And a great fire. Hide in Brokilon little sister dont ride south. Youve done enough for us you cannot do any more now. And you do not have to. We have to. Esstedd esse creasa! It is time we left. Farewell.
The air around them was heavy and dense.
The teleprojective spell was complicated; they had to cast it together joining their hands and thoughts. Even then it turned out to be a devilishly great effort. Because the distance was considerable too.
Philippa Eilharts tightly closed eyelids twitched Triss Merigold panted and there were beads of sweat on Keira Metzs high forehead. Only on Margarita Laux-Antilles face was there no sign of fatigue.
It suddenly became very bright in the poorly lit chamber and a mosaic of flashes danced across the dark wood panelling. A sphere glowing with a milky light was suspended over the round table. Philippa Eilhart chanted the end of the spell and the sphere descended away from her onto one of the twelve chairs positioned around the table. A vague shape appeared inside the sphere. The image shimmered as the projection was not very stable. But it quickly became more defined.
Bloody hell Keira muttered wiping her forehead. Havent they heard of glamarye or beautifying spells down in Nilfgaard?
Apparently not said Triss out of the corner of her mouth. They dont seem to have heard of fashion either.
Or of make-up Philippa said softly. But now hush. And dont stare at her. We must stabilise the projection and welcome our guest. Intensify me Rita.
Margarita Laux-Antille repeated the spells formula and Philippas movements. The image shimmered several times lost its foggy vagueness and unnatural gleam and its contours and colours sharpened. The sorceresses could now look at the shape on the other side of the table even more closely. Triss bit her lip and winked at Keira conspiratorially.
The woman in the projection had a pale face with poor complexion dull expressionless eyes thin bluish lips and a somewhat hooked nose. She was wearing a strange conical and slightly crumpled hat. Dark not very fresh-looking hair fell from beneath the soft brim. The impressions of unattractiveness and seediness were complemented by her shapeless black baggy robes embroidered on the shoulders with frayed silver thread. The embroidery depicted a half-moon within a circle of stars. It was the only decoration worn by the Nilfgaardian sorceress.
Philippa Eilhart stood up trying not display her jewellery lace or cleavage too ostentatiously.
Mistress Assire she said. Welcome to Montecalvo. We are immensely pleased that you have agreed to accept our invitation.
I did it out of curiosity the sorceress from Nilfgaard said in an unexpectedly pleasant and melodious voice straightening her hat involuntarily. Her hand was slim marked by yellow spots her fingernails broken and uneven and clearly bitten.
Only out of curiosity she repeated. The consequences of which may yet prove catastrophic for me. I would ask for an explanation.
I shall provide one forthwith Philippa nodded giving a sign to the other sorceresses. But first however allow me to call forth projections of the other participants of this gathering and make some introductions. Please be patient for a moment.
The sorceresses linked hands again and together began the incantations once more. The air in the chamber hummed like a taut wire as a glowing fog flowed down from behind the panels on the ceiling filling the room with a shimmer of shadows. Spheres of pulsing light hung above three of the unoccupied chairs and the outlines of shapes became visible. The first one to appear was Sabrina Glevissig in a turquoise dress with a provocatively plunging neckline and a large lace standing-up collar beautifully framing her coiffured hair which was held in a diamond tiara. Next to her Sheala de Tancarville emerged from the hazy light of the projection dressed in black velvet sewn with pearls and with her neck draped with silver fox furs. The enchantress from Nilfgaard nervously licked her thin lips.
Just you wait for Francesca thought Triss. When you see Francesca you black rat your eyes will pop out of your head.
Francesca Findabair did not disappoint. Not by her lavish dress the colour of bulls blood nor with her majestic hairstyle nor her ruby necklace nor her doe eyes ringed with provocative elven make-up.
Welcome ladies Philippa said to Montecalvo Castle whither I have invited you to discuss certain issues of considerable importance. I bemoan the fact that we are meeting in the form of teleprojection. But neither the time nor the distances dividing us nor the situation we all find ourselves in permitted a face-to-face meeting. I am Philippa Eilhart the lady of this castle. As the initiator of this meeting and the hostess I shall perform the introductions. On my right is Margarita Laux-Antille the rectoress of the academy in Aretuza. On my left is Triss Merigold of Maribor and Keira Metz of Carreras. Continuing Sabrina Glevissig of Ard Carraigh. Sheala de Tancarville of Creyden in Kovir. Francesca Findabair also known as Enid an Gleanna the present queen of the Valley of Flowers. And finally Assire var Anahid of Vicovaro the Nilfgaardian Empire. And now—
And now I bid farewell! Sabrina Glevissig screamed pointing a heavily beringed hand at Francesca. You have gone too far Philippa! I have no intention of sitting at the same table as that bloody elf–even as an illusion! The blood on the walls and floors of Garstang has not even faded! And she spilt that blood! She and Vilgefortz!
I would request you observe etiquette Philippa said gripping the edge of the table with both hands. And keep calm. Listen to what I have to say I ask for nothing more. When I finish each of you shall decide whether to stay or leave. The projection is voluntary it may be interrupted at any moment. All I ask is that those who decide to leave keep this meeting secret.
I knew it! Sabrina jumped up so suddenly that for a moment she moved out of the projection. A secret meeting! Clandestine arrangements! To put it bluntly: a conspiracy! And its quite clear against whom it is directed. Are you mocking us Philippa? You demand that we keep a secret from our kings and comrades whom you did not condescend to invite. And there sits Enid Findabair–reigning in Dol Blathanna by the grace of Emhyr var Emreis–the queen of the elves who are actively providing Nilfgaard with armed support. If that were not enough I notice with astonishment that we are joined by a Nilfgaardian sorceress. Since when did the mages of Nilfgaard stop professing blind obedience and slavish servility to imperial rule? Secrets? What secrets I am asking! If she is here it is with the permission of Emhyr! By his order! As his eyes and ears!
I repudiate that Assire var Anahid said calmly. No one knows that I am taking part in this meeting. I was asked to keep it secret which I have done and will continue to do. For my own sake as much as yours. For were it to come to light I would not survive. Thats the servility of the Empires mages for you. We have the choice of servility or the scaffold. I took a risk. I did not come here as a spy. I can only prove it in one way: through my own death. It would be sufficient for the secrecy that our hostess is appealing for to be broken. It would be sufficient for news of our meeting to go beyond these walls for me to lose my life.
Betrayal of the secret could have unpleasant consequences for me too Francesca said smiling charmingly. You have a wonderful opportunity for revenge Sabrina.
My revenge will come about in other ways elf said Sabrina and her black eyes flashed ominously. Should the secret come to light it wont be through my fault or through my carelessness. By no means mine!
Are you suggesting something?
Of course interrupted Philippa Eilhart. Of course Sabrina is. She is subtly reminding you about my collaboration with Sigismund Dijkstra. As though she didnt have any contact with King Henselts spies!
There is a difference Sabrina barked. I wasnt Henselts lover for three years! Nor that of his spies for that matter!
Enough of this! Be quiet!
I concur Sheala de Tancarville suddenly said in a loud voice. Be quiet Sabrina. Thats enough about Thanedd enough about spying and extramarital affairs. I did not come here to take part in arguments or to listen to old grudges and insults being bandied about. Nor am I interested in being your mediator. And if I was invited with that intention I declare that those efforts were in vain. Indeed I have my suspicions that I am participating in vain and without purpose that I am wasting time which I only wrested with difficulty from my scholarly work. I shall however refrain from presuppositions. I propose that we give the floor to Philippa Eilhart. Let us discover the aim of this gathering. Let us learn the roles we are expected to play here. Then we shall decide–without unnecessary emotion–whether to continue with the performance or let the curtain fall. The discretion we have been asked for binds us all. Along with the measures that I Sheala de Tancarville will personally take against the indiscreet.
None of the sorceresses moved or spoke. Triss did not doubt Shealas warning for a second. The recluse from Kovir was not one to make hollow threats.
We give you the floor Philippa. And I ask the honourable assembly to remain quiet until she indicates that she has finished.
Philippa Eilhart stood up her dress rustling.
Distinguished sisters she said. Our situation is grave. Magic is under threat. The tragic events on Thanedd to which my thoughts return with regret and reluctance proved that the effects of hundreds of years of apparently peaceful cooperation could be laid waste in an instant as self-interest and inflated ambitions came to the fore. We now have discord disorder mutual hostility and mistrust. Events are beginning to get out of control. In order to regain control in order to prevent a cataclysm happening the helm of this storm-tossed ship must be grasped by strong hands. Mistress Laux-Antille Mistress Merigold Mistress Metz and I have discussed the matter and we are in agreement. It is not enough to re-establish the Chapter and the Council which were destroyed on Thanedd. In any case there is no one left to rebuild the two institutions no guarantee that should they be rebuilt they would not be infected with the disease that destroyed the previous ones. An utterly new secret organisation should be founded which will exclusively serve matters of magic. Which will do everything to prevent a cataclysm. For if magic were to perish our world would perish with it. Just as happened many centuries ago the world without magic and the progress it brings with it will be plunged into chaos and darkness; will drown in blood and barbarity. We invite the ladies present here to take part in our initiative: to actively participate in the work proposed by this secret assembly. We took the decision to summon you here in order to hear your opinions on this matter. With this I have finished.
Thank you Sheala de Tancarville said nodding. If you will allow ladies I shall begin. My first question dear Philippa is: why me? Why have I been summoned here? Many times have I refused to have my candidature to the Chapter put forward and I resigned my seat on the Council. Firstly my work absorbs me. Secondly I am ever of the opinion that there are others in Kovir Poviss and Hengfors more worthy of these honours. So I ask why I have been invited here and not Carduin. Not Istredd of Aedd Gynvael not Tugdual or Zangenis?
Because they are men replied Philippa. This organisation will consist exclusively of women. Mistress Assire?
I withdraw my question the Nilfgaardian enchantress smiled. It was coincident with the substance of Mistress De Tancarvilles. The answer satisfies me.
It smacks to me of female chauvinism Sabrina Glevissig said with a sneer. Particularly coming from your lips Philippa after your change in… sexual orientation. I have nothing against men. Id go further; I adore men and I cannot imagine life without them. But… after a moments reflection… Yours is actually a reasonable proposal. Men are psychologically unstable too prone to emotions; not to be relied upon in moments of crisis.
Thats right Margarita Laux-Antille admitted calmly. I often compare the results of the novices from Aretuza with those of the boys from the school in Ban Ard and the comparisons are invariably to the girls credit. Magic requires patience delicacy intelligence prudence and perseverance not to mention the humble but calm endurance of defeat and failure. Ambition is the undoing of men. They always want what they know to be impossible and unattainable. And they are unaware of the attainable.
Enough enough enough Sheala interrupted her making no effort to hide a smile. There is nothing worse than chauvinism underpinned by scholarship. You ought to be ashamed Rita. Nonetheless… Yes I also consider the proposed single-sex structure of this… convent or perhaps if you will this lodge justified. As we have heard it concerns the future of magic and magic is too important a matter to entrust its fate to men.
If I may came the melodious voice of Francesca Findabair I should like to cut these digressions about the natural and undeniable domination of our sex short for a moment and focus on matters concerning the proposed initiative the goal of which is still not entirely clear to me. For the moment chosen is not accidental and gives food for thought. A war is being waged. Nilfgaard has crushed the northern kingdoms and nailed them down. Is there not then concealed beneath the vague slogans I have heard here the understandable desire to reverse that state of affairs? To crush and nail down Nilfgaard? And then to tan the hides of the insolent elves? If that is so my dear Philippa we shall not find common grounds for agreement.
Is that the reason I have been invited here? Assire var Anahid asked. I do not pay much attention to politics but I know that the imperial army is seizing the advantage over your armies in this war. Apart from Mistresses Francesca and de Tancarville who represents a neutral kingdom all of you ladies represent kingdoms which are hostile to the Nilfgaardian Empire. How am I to understand these words of magical solidarity? As an incitement to treachery? Im sorry but I cannot see myself in such a role.
On finishing her speech Assire leant forward as though touching something which was outside the frame of the projection. It seemed to Triss she could hear miaowing.
Shes even got a cat Keira Metz whispered. And I bet its black…
Quiet hissed Philippa. My dear Francesca most esteemed Mistress Assire. Our initiative is intended to be utterly apolitical; that is its fundamental premise. We shall not be guided by interests of race kingdoms kings or imperators but by the interests of magic and its future.
While putting magic first Sabrina Glevissig said and smiled sneeringly I hope we will not forget though about the interests of sorceresses. We know after all how sorcerers are treated in Nilfgaard. We can sit here chatting away apolitically but when Nilfgaard triumphs and we end up under imperial rule we shall all look like…
Triss shifted anxiously Philippa sighed almost inaudibly. Keira lowered her head Sheala pretended to be straightening her boa. Francesca bit her lip. Assire var Anahids face did not twitch but a faint blush appeared on it.
It will be bad for all of us is what I meant to say Sabrina finished quickly. Philippa Triss and I all three of us were on Sodden Hill. Emhyr will seek revenge for that defeat for Thanedd for all our activities. But that is only one of the reservations that the declared political neutrality of this convent arouses in me. Does participation in it mean immediate resignation from the active–and indeed political–service we presently offer to our kings? Or are we to remain in that service and serve two masters: magic and kingly rule?
When someone tells me he is politically neutral Francesca smiled I always ask which politics he specifically has in mind.
And I know he definitely isnt thinking about the one he engages in Assire var Anahid added looking at Philippa.
I am politically neutral Margarita Laux-Antille chimed in lifting her head and my school is politically neutral. I have in mind every type kind and class of politics which exists!
Dear ladies Sheala said having remained silent for some time. Remember you are the dominant sex. So dont behave like little girls fighting over a tray of sweetmeats. The principium proposed by Philippa is clear at least to me and I still have too little cause to consider you any less intelligent. Outside this chamber be who you want serve who you wish as faithfully as you want. But when the convent meets we shall focus exclusively on magic and its future.
That is precisely how I imagine it Philippa Eilhart agreed. I know there are many problems and that there are doubts and uncertainties. We shall discuss them during the next meeting in which we shall all participate; not in the form of projections or illusions but in person. Your presence will be treated not as a formal act of accession to the convent but as a gesture of good will. We shall decide together whether a convent of this kind will be founded at all then. Together. All of us. With equal rights.
All of us? Sheala repeated. I see empty seats and I presume they were not put here inadvertently.
The convent ought to number twelve sorceresses. I would like the candidate for one of those empty seats to be proposed and presented to us at our next meeting by Mistress Assire. There must be at least one more worthy sorceress in the Nilfgaardian Empire. I leave the second place for you to fill Francesca so that you will not feel alone as the only pureblood elf. The third…
Enid an Gleanna raised her head.
I would like two places. I have two candidates.
Do any of you have any objections to this request? If not then I concur. Today is the fifth day of August the fifth day after the new moon. We shall meet again on the second day after the full moon sisters dear in fourteen days.
Just a moment Sheala de Tancarville interrupted. One place still remains empty. Who is to be the twelfth sorceress?
That is precisely the first problem the lodge will have to solve Philippa said smiling mysteriously. In two weeks time I shall tell you who ought to take their place in the twelfth seat. And then we shall ponder over how to get that person to take it up. My choice will astonish you. Because it is not an ordinary person most esteemed sisters. It is death or life destruction or rebirth chaos or order. Depending on how you look at it.
The entire village had poured out of their houses to watch the gang pass through. Tuzik also joined them. He had work to do but he couldnt resist it. In recent days people had been talking a great deal about the Rats. A rumour was even going around that they had all been caught and hanged. The rumour had been false though the evidence of which was ostentatiously and unhurriedly parading in front of the whole village at this very moment.
Impudent scoundrels someone behind Tuzik whispered and it was a whisper full of admiration. Ambling down the main street…
Decked out like wedding guests…
And what horses! You dont even see Nilfgaardians with horses like that!
Ha theyre nicked. Nobodys horses are safe from them. And you can offload them everywhere nowadays. But they keep the best for emselves…
That one up the front look thats Giselher… Their leader.
And next to him on the chestnut its that she-elf… they call her Iskra…
A cur came scuttling out from behind a fence barking furiously scurrying around near the fore hooves of Iskras mare. The elf shook her luxurious mane of dark hair turned her horse around leant down to the ground and lashed the dog with a knout. The cur howled and spun on the spot three times as Iskra spat on it. Tuzik muttered a curse between clenched teeth.
The people standing close by continued to whisper discreetly pointing out the various Rats as they passed through the village. Tuzik listened because he had to. He knew the gossip and tales as well as the others and easily recognised the one with the long tousled straw-coloured hair eating an apple as Kayleigh the broad-shouldered one as Asse and the one in the embroidered sheepskin jerkin as Reef.
Two girls riding side by side and holding hands brought up the rear of the procession. The taller of the two riding a bay had her hair shorn as though recovering from the typhus her jacket was unbuttoned her lacy blouse gleamed white beneath it and her necklace bracelets and earrings flashed brightly.
That shaven-headed one is Mistle… someone near Tuzik said. Dripping with trinkets just like a Yule tree.
They say shes killed more people than shes seen springs…
And the other one? On the roan? With the sword across her back?
Falka they call her. Shes been riding with the Rats since the summer. She also spposed to be a nasty piece of work…
That nasty piece of work Tuzik guessed wasnt much older than his daughter Milena. The flaxen hair of the young bandit tumbled from beneath her velvet beret decorated with an impudently jiggling bunch of pheasant feathers. Around her neck glowed a poppy-red silk kerchief tied up in a fanciful bow.
A sudden commotion had broken out among the villagers who had poured out in front of their cottages. For Giselher the one riding at the head of the gang had reined in his horse and with a careless gesture thrown a clinking purse at the foot of Granny Mykita who was standing leaning on a cane.
May the Gods protect you gracious youth! wailed Granny Mykita. May you enjoy good health O our benefactor may you—
A peal of laughter from Iskra drowned out the crones mumbling. The elf threw a jaunty leg over her pommel reached into a pouch and vigorously scattered a handful of coins among the crowd. Reef and Asse followed her lead a veritable silver rain showering down on the dusty road. Kayleigh giggling threw his apple core into the figures scrambling to gather up the money.
Our benefactors!
Our bold young hawks!
May fate be kind to you!
Tuzik didnt run after the others didnt drop to his knees to scrabble in the sand and chicken shit for coins. He stood by the fence watching the girls pass slowly by.
The younger of the two the one with the flaxen hair noticed his gaze and expression. She let go of the short-haired girls hand spurred her horse and rode straight for him pressing him against the fence and almost getting her stirrup caught. Her green eyes flashed and he shuddered seeing so much evil and cold hatred in them.
Let him be Falka the other girl called needlessly.
The green-eyed bandit settled for pushing Tuzik against the fence and rode off after the Rats without even looking back.
Our benefactors!
Young hawks!
Tuzik spat.
In the early evening men in black uniforms arrived in the village. They were forbidding-looking horsemen from the fort near Fen Aspra. Their hooves thudded their horses neighed and their weapons clanked. When asked the village headman and other peasants lied through their teeth and sent the pursuers on a false trail. No one asked Tuzik. Fortunately.
When he returned from the pasture and went into his garden he heard voices. He recognised the twittering of Zgarba the carters twin girls the cracking falsettos of his neighbours adolescent boys. And Milenas voice. Theyre playing he thought. He turned the corner beyond the woodshed. And froze in his tracks.
Milena!
Milena his only surviving daughter the apple of his eye had hung a piece of wood across her back on a string like a sword. Shed let her hair down attached a cockerels feather to her woollen hat and tied her mothers kerchief around her neck. In a bizarre fanciful bow.
Her eyes were green.
Tuzik had never beaten his daughter before never raised his hand against her.
That was the first time.
Lightning flashed on the horizon and thunder rumbled. A gust of wind raked across the surface of the Ribbon.
Theres going to be a storm thought Milva and after the storm the rain will set in. The chaffinches werent mistaken.
She urged her horse on. She would have to hurry if she wanted to catch up with the Witcher before the storm broke.
I have met many military men in my life. I have known marshals generals commanders and governors the victors of numerous campaigns and battles. Ive listened to their stories and recollections. Ive seen them poring over maps drawing lines of various colours on them making plans thinking up strategies. In those paper wars everything worked everything functioned everything was clear and everything was in exemplary order. Thats how it has to be explained the military men. The army represents discipline and order above all. The army cannot exist without discipline and order.
So it is all the stranger that real wars–and I have seen several real wars–have as much in common with discipline and order as a whorehouse with a fire raging through it.
Dandelion Half a Century of Poetry
CHAPTER TWO
The crystalline clear water of the Ribbon brimmed over the edge of the drop in a smooth gentle arc falling in a soughing and frothing cascade among boulders as black as onyx. It broke up on them and vanished in a white foam from where it spilt into a wide pool which was so transparent that every pebble and every green strand of waterweed swaying in the current could be seen in the variegated mosaic of the riverbed.
Both banks were overgrown with carpets of knotgrass through which dippers bustled proudly flashing the white ruffles on their throats. Above the knotgrass bushes shimmered green brown and ochre against spruce trees which looked as though they had been sprinkled with silver.
Indeed Dandelion sighed. Its beautiful here.
A large dark bull trout attempted to jump the lip of the waterfall. For a moment it hung in the air flexing its fins and flicking its tail and then fell heavily into the seething foam.
The darkening sky to the south was split by a forked ribbon of lightning and the dull echo of distant thunder rumbled over the wall of trees. The Witchers bay mare danced jerked her head and bared her teeth trying to spit out the bit. Geralt tugged the reins hard and the mare skittered backwards dancing hooves clattering on the stones.
Whoa! Whoaaa! Do you see her Dandelion? Damned ballerina! Im getting rid of this bloody beast the first chance I get! Strike me down if I dont swap her for a donkey!
See that happening anytime soon? said the poet scratching the itching mosquito bites on the nape of his neck. This valleys savage landscape indeed offers unparalleled aesthetic impressions but for a change Id be happy to gaze on a less aesthetic tavern. Ive spent almost a week admiring nothing but romantic nature breathtaking panoramas and distant horizons. I miss the indoors. Particularly the kind where they serve warm victuals and cold beer.
Youll have to carry on missing them a bit longer said the Witcher turning around in the saddle. That I miss civilisation a little too may alleviate your suffering. As you know I was stuck in Brokilon for exactly thirty-six days… and nights too when romantic nature was freezing my arse crawling across my back and sprinkling dew on my nose—Whoaaa! Pox on you! Will you stop sulking you bloody nag?
Its the horseflies biting her. The bugs are getting vicious and bloodthirsty because a storms approaching. The thunder and lightnings getting more frequent to the south.
So I see the Witcher said looking at the sky and reining in his skittish horse. And the winds coming from a different direction too. It smells of the sea. The weathers changing without a doubt. Lets ride. Urge on that fat gelding of yours Dandelion.
My steed is called Pegasus.
Of course what else? Know what? Lets think up a name for my elven nag. Mmm…
Why not Roach? mocked the troubadour.
Roach agreed the Witcher. Nice.
Geralt?
Yes.
Have you ever had a horse that wasnt called Roach?
No answered the Witcher after a moments thought. I havent. Spur on that castrated Pegasus of yours Dandelion. Weve a long road ahead of us.
Indeed grunted the poet. Nilfgaard… How many miles away do you reckon?
Plenty.
Will we make it before winter?
Well ride to Verden first. We have to discuss… certain matters there.
What matters? Youll neither discourage me nor get rid of me. Im coming along! That is my last word.
We shall see. As I said we ride to Verden.
Is it far? Do you know these lands?
Yes I do. We are at Ceann Treise Falls and in front of us theres a place called Seventh Mile. Those are the Owl Hills beyond the river.
And were heading south downriver? The Ribbon joins the Yaruga near the stronghold at Bodrog…
Were heading south but along the other bank. The Ribbon bends towards the west and well go through the forest. I want to get to a place called Drieschot or the Triangle. The borders of Verden Brugge and Brokilon meet there.
And from there?
Along the Yaruga. To the mouth. And to Cintra.
And then?
And then well see. If at all possible force that idle Pegasus of yours to go a little quicker.
A downpour caught them as they were crossing right in the middle of the river. First a strong wind got up with hurricane-force gusts blowing their hair and mantles around and lashing their faces with leaves and branches torn from the trees along the banks. They urged on their horses with shouts and kicks of their heels stirring up the water as they headed for the bank. Then the wind suddenly dropped and they saw a grey curtain of rain gliding towards them. The surface of the Ribbon turned white and boiling as though someone were hurling great handfuls of gravel at the river.
Having reached the bank drenched to the skin they hurried to hide in the forest. The branches created a dense green roof over their heads but it was not a roof capable of protecting them from such a downpour. The rain lashed intensely and forced down the leaves and was soon pouring on them almost as hard as it had in the open.
They wrapped themselves up in their mantles put up their hoods and kept moving. It became dark among the trees the only light coming from the increasingly frequent flashes of lightning. The thunder followed with long deafening crashes. Roach shied stamped her hooves and skittered around. Pegasus remained utterly calm.
Geralt! Dandelion yelled trying to outshout a peal of thunder which was crashing through the forest like a gigantic wagon. We have to stop! Lets shelter somewhere!
Where? he shouted back. Ride on!
And they rode on.
After some time the rain visibly eased off the strong wind once again soughed in the branches and the crashes of thunder stopped boring into their ears. They rode out onto a track among a dense alder grove then into a clearing. A towering beech tree stood in the middle. Beneath its boughs on a thick wide carpet of brown leaves and beechnuts stood a wagon harnessed to a pair of mules. A wagoner sat on the coachmans seat pointing a crossbow at them. Geralt swore. His curse was drowned out by a clap of thunder.
Put the bow down Kolda said a short man in a straw hat turning from the trunk of a beech tree hopping on one leg and fastening his trousers. Theyre not the ones were waiting for. But they are customers. Dont frighten away customers. We dont have much time but theres always time to trade!
What the bloody hell? muttered Dandelion behind Geralts back.
Over here Master Elves! the man in the hat called over. Dont you worry no harm will come your way. Ness a tearth! Va Seidhe. Ceadmil! Were mates right? Want to trade? Come on over here under this tree out of the rain!
Geralt wasnt surprised by the wagoners mistake. Both he and Dandelion were wrapped in grey elven mantels. He was also wearing a jerkin decorated with the kind of leafy pattern elves favoured given to him by the dryads was riding a horse with typical elven trappings and a decorated bridle. His face was partially hidden by his hood. As far as the foppish Dandelion was concerned he was regularly mistaken for an elf or half-elf particularly since he had begun wearing his hair shoulder-length and taken up the habit of occasionally curling it with tongs.
Careful Geralt muttered dismounting. Youre an elf. So dont open your trap if you dont have to.
Why?
Because theyre hawkers.
Dandelion hissed softly. He knew what that meant.
Money made the world go round and supply was driven by demand. The Scoiatael roaming the forests gathered saleable booty that was useless to them while suffering from a shortage of equipment and weapons themselves. That was how forest trading began. And how a class of humans who earned their living from this kind of trade sprang up. The wagons of profiteers who traded with the Squirrels began appearing clandestinely on forest tracks paths glades and clearings. The elves called them havcaaren an untranslatable word but one which was associated with rapacious greed. Among humans the term hawker became widespread and the connotations were even more hideous than usual because the traders themselves were so awful. Cruel and ruthless they stopped at nothing not even killing. A hawker caught by the army could not count on mercy. Hence he was not in the habit of showing it himself. If they came across anyone who might turn them in hawkers would reach for a crossbow or a knife without a second thought.
So they were out of luck. It was fortunate the hawkers had taken them for elves. Geralt pulled his hood down over his eyes and began to wonder what would happen if the havcaaren saw through the masquerade.
What foul weather said the trader rubbing his hands. Its pouring like the sky was leaking! Awful tedd ellea? But what to do theres no bad weather for doing business. Theres only bad goods and bad money innit! You know what Im saying?
Geralt nodded. Dandelion grunted something from under his hood. Luckily for them the elves contemptuous dislike of conversing with humans was generally known and came as no surprise. The wagoner did not put the crossbow down however which was not a good sign.
Who are you with? Whose commando? the hawker asked unconcerned as any serious trader would be by the reticence of his customers. Coinneach Dá Reos? Or Angus Bri-Cris? Or maybe Riordains? I heard Riordain put some royal bailiffs to the sword. They were travelling home after theyd done their duty collecting a levy. And they had it in coinage not grain. I dont take wood tar nor grain in payment nor blood-stained clothing and if were talking furs only mink sable or ermine. But what I like most is common coinage precious stones and trinkets! If you have them we can trade! I only have first-class goods! Evelienn; vara en ard scedde ellea you know what I mean? Ive got everything. Take a look.
The trader went over to the wagon and pulled back the edge of the wet tarpaulin. They saw swords bows bunches of arrows and saddles. The hawker rooted around among them and took out an arrow. The arrowhead was serrated and sawn through.
You wont find any other traders selling this he said boastfully. Theyd shit themselves if they were to touch em. Youd be torn apart by horses if you were caught with arrows like that. But I know what you Squirrels like. Customer comes first and youve got to take a risk when you barter as long as theres a profit from it! Ive got barbed arrowheads at… nine orens a dozen. Naevde aen tvedeane ellea got it Seidhe? I swear Im not fleecing you I dont make much myself I swear on my little childrens heads. And if you take three dozen straight away Ill knock a bit off the price. Its a bargain I swear a sheer bargain—Hey Seidhe hands off my wagon!
Dandelion nervously withdrew his hand from the tarpaulin and pulled his hood further down over his face. Once again Geralt quietly cursed the bards irrepressible curiosity.
Mirme vara mumbled Dandelion raising his hand in a gesture of apology. Squaessme.
No harm done said the hawker grinning. But no looking in there because theres other goods in the wagon too. Not for sale those not for Seidhe. A special order ha ha. But thats enough rabbiting… Show us the colour of your money.
Here we go thought Geralt looking at the wagoners nocked crossbow. He had reason to believe the quarrels tip was barbed too–just like the arrows hed been so proudly shown moments before–and would after entering the belly exit through the back in three or sometimes four places turning the victims internal organs into a very messy goulash.
Ness tedd he said trying to speak in a singsong way. Tearde. Mireann vara vaen vort. Well trade when we return from the commando. Ellea? Understood Dhoine?
Understood the hawker said spitting. Understood that youre skint. Youd like the goods you just dont have the readies. Be off with you! And dont come back because Im meeting important parties here. Itll be safer if they dont clap eyes on you. Go to—
He broke off hearing the snorting of a horse.
Damn it! he snarled. Its too late! Theyre here! Hoods down elves! Dont move and button your lips! Kolda you ass put that crossbow down and fast!
The heavy rain thunder and the carpet of leaves had dampened the thudding of hooves which meant the riders had been able to ride up undetected and surround the beech tree in an instant. They werent Scoiatael. Squirrels didnt wear armour and the metal helmets spaulders and hauberks of the eight horsemen surrounding the tree were glistening in the rain.
One of the horsemen approached at a walk and towered over the hawker like a mountain. He was of impressive height and was mounted on a powerful warhorse. A wolf skin was draped over his armoured shoulders and his face was obscured by a helmet with a broad protruding nose-guard reaching down to his lower lip. The stranger was holding a menacing-looking war hammer.
Rideaux! he called huskily.
Faoiltiarna! replied the trader in a slightly quavering voice.
The horseman came even closer and leant forward. Water poured down from his steel nose-guard straight onto his vambrace and the balefully glistening point of the hammer.
Faoiltiarna! the hawker repeated bowing low. He removed his hat and the rain immediately plastered his thinning hair to his head. Faoiltiarna! Im your man; I know the password and the countersign… Ive been with Faoiltiarna Your Lordship… Here I am as arranged…
And those men who are they?
My escort the hawker said bowing even lower. You know elves…
The prisoner?
On the wagon. In a coffin.
In a coffin? The thunder partially drowned the furious roar of the horseman. You wont get away with this! Viscount de Rideaux gave clear instructions that the prisoner was to be handed over alive!
Hes alive hes alive the trader gibbered hurriedly. As per orders… Shoved into a coffin but alive… The coffin wasnt my idea Your Lordship. It was Faoiltiarnas…
The horseman rapped the hammer against his stirrup as a sign. Three other horsemen dismounted and pulled the tarpaulin off the wagon. When they had thrown various saddles blankets and bunches of harnesses onto the ground Geralt actually saw a coffin made of fresh pine lit by a flash of lightning. He didnt look too closely however. He felt a tingling in the tips of his fingers. He knew what was about to happen.
Whats all this Your Lordship? the hawker said looking at the goods lying on the wet leaves. Youre chucking all my gear out of the wagon.
Ill buy it all. Along with the horse and cart.
Aaah a repulsive grin crept over the traders bristly face. Now youre talking. Thatll be… Let me think… Five hundred if youll excuse me Your Nobleness if were talking Temerian currency. If its your florins then itll be forty-five.
Thats cheap snorted the horseman smiling eerily behind his nose-guard. Come closer.
Watch out Dandelion hissed the Witcher imperceptibly unfastening the buckle of his mantle. It thundered once more.
The hawker approached the horseman naively counting on the deal of his life. And in a way it was the deal of his life not the best perhaps but certainly the last. The horseman stood in his stirrups and drove the point of the hammer down with great force onto the hawkers bald crown. The trader dropped without a sound shuddered flapped his arms and scraped the wet carpet of leaves with his heels. One of the men rummaging around on the wagon threw a leather strap around the wagoners neck and pulled it tight; the other leapt forward and stabbed him with a dagger.
One of the horsemen raised his crossbow quickly to his shoulder and took aim at Dandelion. But Geralt already had a sword–one of those thrown from the wagon–in his hand. Seizing the weapon halfway down the blade he flung it like a javelin and hit the crossbowman who fell off the horse with an expression of utter astonishment on his face.
Run Dandelion!
Dandelion caught up with Pegasus and leapt for the saddle with a desperate bound. The jump was a tad too desperate however and the poet was a tad too inexperienced. He didnt hang onto the pommel and tumbled to the ground on the other side of the horse. And that saved his life as the blade of the attacking horsemans sword cut through the air above Pegasuss ears with a hiss. The gelding shied jerked and collided with the attackers horse.
They arent elves! yelled the horseman in the helmet with the nose-guard drawing his sword. Take them alive! Alive!
One of the men who had jumped down from the wagon hesitated on hearing the order. Geralt however had already drawn his own sword and didnt hesitate for a second. The fervour of the other two men was somewhat cooled by the fountain of blood which spurted over them. He took advantage of the situation and cut one of them down. But the horsemen were already charging at him. He ducked under their swords parried their blows dodged aside and suddenly felt a piercing pain in his right knee. He could feel himself keeling over. He wasnt hurt; the injured leg which had been treated in Brokilon had simply crumpled under him without warning.
The foot soldier aiming for him with the butt of a battle-axe suddenly groaned and lurched forward as though someone had shoved him hard in the back. Before he fell the Witcher saw an arrow with long fletchings sticking out of his assailants side driven in to halfway up the shaft. Dandelion yelled; a thunderclap drowned out his cry.
Geralt who was hanging on to one of the cartwheels saw a fair-haired girl with a drawn bow dashing out of an alder grove. The horsemen saw her too. They couldnt fail to see her because at that moment one of them tumbled backwards over his horses croup his throat transformed into a scarlet pulp by an arrow. The remaining three including the leader in the helmet with the nose-guard assessed the danger immediately and galloped towards the archer hiding behind their horses necks. They thought the horses necks represented sufficient protection against the arrows. They were mistaken.
Maria Barring also known as Milva drew her bow. She took aim calmly the bowstring pressed against her cheek.
The first of her attackers screamed and slid off his horse. One foot caught in the stirrup and he was trampled beneath the horses iron-shod hooves. Another arrow hurled the second from his saddle. The third man the leader who was already close stood in the saddle and raised his sword to strike. Milva did not even flinch. Fearlessly looking straight at her attacker she bent her bow and shot an arrow right into his face from a distance of five paces striking just to the side of the steel nose-guard and jumping aside as she shot. The arrow passed right through his skull knocking off his helmet. The horse did not slow its gallop. The horseman now lacking a helmet and a considerable part of his skull remained in the saddle for a few seconds then slowly tipped over and crashed into a puddle. The horse neighed and ran on.
Geralt struggled to his feet and massaged his leg which though painful for a wonder seemed to be functioning normally. He could stand on it without difficulty and walk. Next to him Dandelion hauled himself up throwing off the corpse with a mutilated throat which was weighing down on him. The poets face was the colour of quicklime.
Milva came closer pulling an arrow from a dead man as she approached.
Thank you the Witcher said. Dandelion say thank you. This is Maria Barring or Milva. Its thanks to her were alive.
Milva yanked an arrow from another of the dead bodies and examined the bloody arrowhead. Dandelion mumbled incoherently bent over in a courtly–but somewhat quavering–bow then dropped to his knees and vomited.
Whos that? the archer asked wiping the arrowhead on some wet leaves and replacing it in her quiver. A comrade of yours Witcher?
Yes. His names Dandelion. Hes a poet.
A poet Milva watched the troubadour wracked by attacks of dry retching and then looked up. That I can understand. But I dont quite understand why hes puking here instead of writing rhymes in a quiet spot somewhere. But I suppose thats none of my business.
It is yours in a sense. You saved his skin. And mine too.
Milva wiped her rain-splashed face with the imprint of the bowstring still visible on it. Although she had shot several arrows there was only one imprint; the bowstring pressed against the same place each time.
I was already in the alder grove when you started talking to the hawker she said. I didnt want the scoundrel to see me for there was no need. And then those others arrived and the slaughter began. You messed a few of them up very nicely. You know how to swing a sword Ill give you that. Even if you are a cripple. You should have stayed in Brokilon till your peg healed instead of making it worse. You might limp for the rest of your life. You realise that dont you?
Ill survive.
I reckon you will too. I followed you to warn you and to make you turn back. Your quest wont come to anything. Theres a war raging in the south. The Nilfgaardian Army are marching on Brugge from Drieschot.
How do you know?
Just look at them the girl said making a sweeping gesture and pointing at the bodies and the horses. I mean theyre Nilfgaardians! Cant you see the suns on their helmets? The embroidery on their saddlecloths? Pack up your things and well take to our heels; more of them may arrive any moment. These were mounted scouts.
I dont think they were just scouts he said shaking his head. They were after something.
What might that be just out of interest?
That he said pointing at the pinewood coffin lying in the wagon now darkened from the rain. It wasnt raining as hard as it had been during the short battle and it had stopped thundering. The storm was moving north. The Witcher picked up his sword from among the leaves and jumped onto the wagon quietly cursing because his knee still hurt.
Help me get it open.
What do you want with a stiff…? Milva broke off seeing the holes bored into the lid. Bloody hell! Was the hawker lugging a live person around in here?
Its some kind of prisoner Geralt said levering the lid open. The trader was waiting for these Nilfgaardians to hand him over to them. They exchanged passwords and countersigns…
The lid tore off with the sound of splitting wood revealing a man with a gag over his mouth his arms and legs fastened to the sides of the coffin by leather straps. The Witcher leant over. He took a good look. And again this time more intently. And swore.
Well I never he drawled. What a surprise. Who would have thought it?
Do you know him Witcher?
By sight. He smiled hideously. Put the knife away Milva. Dont cut his bonds. It seems this is an internal Nilfgaardian matter. We shouldnt get involved. Lets leave him as he is.
Am I hearing right? Dandelion asked joining in from behind. He was still pale but curiosity had overcome his other emotions. Are you planning to leave him tied up in the forest? Im guessing youve recognised someone you have a bone to pick with but hes a prisoner by the Gods! He was the prisoner of the men who jumped us and almost killed us. And the enemy of our enemy…
He broke off seeing the Witcher removing a knife from his boot-top. Milva coughed quietly. The captives dark blue eyes previously screwed up against the rain widened. Geralt leant over and cut the strap fastened around the prisoners left arm.
Look Dandelion he said seizing the captives wrist and raising his now-free arm. Do you see the scar on his hand? Ciri did that. On the Isle of Thanedd a month ago. Hes a Nilfgaardian. He came to Thanedd specifically to abduct Ciri and she wounded him defending herself from being captured.
But it all came to nothing anyway muttered Milva. I sense something doesnt add up here. If he kidnapped your Ciri for Nilfgaard how did he end up in this coffin? Why was that hawker handing him over to the Nilfgaardians? Take that gag off him Witcher. Perhaps hell tell us something.
I have no desire to listen to him he said flatly. My hand is itching to stab him through the heart with him lying there looking at me. Its all I can do to restrain myself. And if he opens his mouth I know I wont be able to hold back. I havent told you everything.
Dont hold back then. Milva shrugged her shoulders. Stick him if hes such a villain. But do it quickly because times getting on. As I said the Nilfgaardians will be here soon. Im going to get my horse.
Geralt straightened up and released the captives hand. The man immediately loosened the gag and spat it out of his mouth. But he said nothing. The Witcher threw his knife onto the mans chest.
I dont know what sins you committed for them to trap you in this chest Nilfgaardian he said. And I dont care. Ill leave you this blade. Free yourself. Wait here for your own people or escape into the forest its up to you.
The captive said nothing. Tied up and lying in that wooden crate he looked even more miserable and defenceless than he had on Thanedd–and Geralt had seen him there on his knees wounded and trembling with fear in a pool of blood. He also looked considerably younger now. The Witcher wouldnt have put him at more than twenty-five.
I spared your life on the island he said. And Im doing it again. But its the last time. The next time we meet Ill kill you like a dog. Remember that. If you persuade your comrades to pursue us take the coffin with you. Itll come in useful. Lets go Dandelion.
Make haste! Milva shouted turning away at full gallop from the westward track. But not that way! Into the trees by thunder into the trees!
Whats going on?
A large group of riders are heading towards us from the Ribbon! Its Nilfgaard! What are you staring at? To horse before theyre upon us!
The battle for the village had been going on for an hour and wasnt showing any signs of finishing soon. The infantry holding out behind stone walls fences and upturned wagons had repulsed three attacks by the cavalry who came charging at them from the causeway. The width of the causeway did not permit the horsemen to gain enough momentum for a frontal attack but allowed the foot soldiers to concentrate their defence. As a result waves of cavalry repeatedly foundered on the barricades behind which the desperate but fierce soldiers were shooting a hail of quarrels and arrows into the mounted throng. The cavalry seethed and teemed under this assault and then the defenders rushed out at them in a rapid counter-attack fighting furiously with battle-axes guisarmes and studded flails. The cavalry retreated to the ponds leaving human and equine corpses behind while the infantry concealed themselves among the barricades and hurled filthy insults at the enemy. After a while the cavalry formed up and attacked once again.
And again.
Who do you thinks fighting whom? Dandelion asked once more but indistinctly as he was trying to soften and chew a piece of hard tack he had scrounged from Milva.
They were sitting on the very edge of the cliff well hidden among juniper shrubs. They were able to watch the battle without being afraid anyone would notice them. Actually they could do nothing but watch. They had no choice: a battle was raging in front of them and a forest fire was raging behind them.
Its easy to identify them Geralt said reluctantly responding to Dandelions question. Theyre Nilfgaardian horsemen.
And the infantry?
The infantry arent Nilfgaardian.
The horsemen are regular cavalrymen from Verden said Milva until then sombre and strangely taciturn. They have the Verdenian checkerboard emblem sewn onto their tunics. And the ones in the village are the Bruggian regular infantry. You can tell by their banners.
Indeed encouraged by another small victory the infantrymen raised their green standard–with a white cross moline–above the entrenchment. Geralt had been watching intently but hadnt noticed the standard before. It must have gone missing at the start of the battle.
Are we staying here for much longer? Dandelion asked.
Oh dear muttered Milva Here he goes. Take a look around! Whichever way you turn it looks pretty shitty doesnt it?
Dandelion didnt have to look or turn around. The entire horizon was striped with columns of smoke. It was thickest to the north and the west where the armies had set fire to the forests. Smoke was also rising into the sky in many places to the south where they had been heading when the battle had barred their way. And during the hour they had spent on the hill smoke had also started rising to the east.
However the archer began a moment later looking at Geralt Id really like to know what you intend doing now Witcher. Behind us weve got Nilfgaard and a burning forest and you can see for yourself whats in front of us. So what are your plans?
My plans havent changed. Ill wait for this scrap to finish and then Ill head south. Towards the Yaruga.
I think youve lost your mind. Milva scowled. Cant you see whats happening? Its as clear as the nose on your face that its not some leaderless band of mercenaries but something called war. Nilfgaard and Verden are on the march. Theyre sure to have crossed the Yaruga in the south and probably the whole of Brugge and possibly Sodden are in flames—
I have to get to the Yaruga.
Excellent. And what then?
Ill find a boat Ill sail downstream and try to make it to the delta. Then a ship—I mean hell some ships must still sail from there—
To Nilfgaard? she snorted. So the plans havent changed?
You dont have to go with me.
No I dont. And praise the Gods for that because I dont have a death wish. Im not afraid but mind you: getting yourself killed is no claim to fame.
I know he replied calmly. I know from experience. I wouldnt be heading that way if I didnt have to. But I have to so Im going. Nothings going to stop me.
Ah she said looking him up and down. Listen to this hero his voice like someone scraping a sword across a shield. If Imperator Emhyr could hear you Im sure hed be shitting his britches in terror. To my side guards to my side my imperial regiments oh woe is me the Witchers heading for Nilfgaard in a rowing boat soon hell be here to take my crown and life from me! Im doomed! 
Give over Milva.
I wont! Its time someone finally told you the truth to your face. Fuck me with a mangy rabbit if Ive ever seen a stupider clod! Youre going to snatch your maid from Emhyr? The same maid Emhyr has got lined up as his Imperatoress? The girl he snatched from Thanedd? Emhyrs got long hands. They dont let go of what they seize. The kings stand no chance against him but still you fancy yours?
He didnt answer.
Youre heading for Nilfgaard Milva repeated shaking her head in mock sympathy. To fight the Imperator and rescue his fiancée. But have you thought about what might happen? When you get there when you find Ciri in her imperial apartments all dressed in gold and silk what will you say to her? Follow me my darling. What do you want with an imperial throne? Well live together in a shack and eat bark during the lean season. Look at yourself you lame scruff. You even got your coat and boots from the dryads stripped from some elf who died of his wounds in Brokilon. And do you know whatll happen when your maid sees you? Shell spit in your eye and scorn you. Shell order the imperial guard to throw you out on your ear and set the dogs on you!
Milva was speaking louder and louder and she was almost shouting by the end of her tirade. Not only from anger but also to be heard over the intensifying noise of battle. Down below scores–or even hundreds–of throats were roaring. Another attack descended on the Bruggian infantry. But this time from two sides simultaneously. Verdenians dressed in greyish-blue tunics adorned with a chequered pattern galloped along the causeway while a powerful cavalry force in black cloaks dashed out from behind the ponds striking the defenders flank.
Nilfgaard said Milva tersely.
This time the Bruggian infantry had no chance. The cavalry forced their way through the barricades and ripped the defenders apart with their swords. The standard with the cross fell. Some of the infantrymen laid down their arms and surrendered; others tried to escape towards the trees. But as they ran a third unit emerged from the trees and attacked; a mixed band of light cavalry.
The Scoiatael Milva said getting to her feet. Now do you understand whats going on Witcher? Do you get it? Nilfgaard Verden and the Squirrels all at once. War. Like it was in Aedirn a month ago.
Its a raid Geralt said shaking his head. A plundering raid. Only horsemen no infantry…
The infantry are capturing forts and their garrisons. Where do you think those plumes of smoke are coming from? Smokehouses?
The bestial dreadful screams of people fleeing only to be caught and slaughtered by the Squirrels drifted up from the village. Smoke and flames belched from the roofs of the cottages. A strong wind was swiftly spreading the fire from one thatched roof to another.
Look at that village going up in smoke muttered Milva. And theyd only just finished rebuilding it after the last war. They sweated for two years to put up the foundations and itll burn down in a few seconds. Thats a lesson to be learned!
What lesson would that be? asked Geralt brusquely.
She didnt answer. The smoke from the burning village rose up to the top of the cliff stung their eyes and made them water. They could hear the screams from the inferno. Dandelion suddenly went as white as a sheet.
The captives were driven into a huddle surrounded by a ring of soldiers. On the order of a knight in a black-plumed helmet the horsemen began to slash and stab the unarmed villagers. They were trampled by horses as they fell. The ring tightened. The screams which reached the cliff top no longer resembled sounds made by humans.
And you want to travel south? asked the poet looking meaningfully at the Witcher. Through these fires? Where these butchers come from?
Seems to me Geralt replied reluctantly that we dont have a choice.
Yes we do Milva said. I can lead you through the forests to the Owl Hills and back to Ceann Treise. And Brokilon.
Through those burning forests? Through more skirmishes like this?
Its safer than the road south. Its no more than fourteen miles to Ceann Treise and I know which paths to take.
The Witcher looked down at the village perishing in the flames. The Nilfgaardians had dealt with the captives and the cavalry had formed up in marching order. The motley band of Scoiatael set off along the highway leading east.
Im not going back he retorted. But you can escort Dandelion to Brokilon.
No! the poet protested although he still hadnt regained his normal colour. Im going with you.
Milva shrugged picked up her quiver and bow took a step towards the horses and then suddenly turned around.
Devil take it! she snapped. Ive been saving elves from death for too long. I cant just let someone go to his death! Ill lead you to the Yaruga you crazy fools. But by the eastern route not the southern one.
The forests are burning there too.
Ill lead you through the fire. Im used to it.
You dont have to Milva.
Too right I dont. Now to horse! And get a bloody move on!
They didnt get far. The horses had difficulty moving through the undergrowth and along the overgrown tracks and they didnt dare use roads; the hoofbeats and clanking could be heard everywhere betraying the presence of armed forces. Dusk surprised them among brush-covered ravines so they stopped for the night. It wasnt raining and the sky was bright from the glow of fires.
They found a fairly dry place wrapped themselves in their mantles and blankets and sat down. Milva went off to search the surrounding area. As soon as she moved away Dandelion gave vent to the long-suppressed curiosity that the Brokilonian archer had aroused in him.
Thats a comely girl if ever there was one he murmured. Youre lucky when it comes to the female of the species Geralt. Shes tall and curvaceous and walks as though she were dancing. A little too slim in the hips for my taste and a little too sturdy in the shoulders but shes very womanly… And those two little apples in the front ho ho… Almost bursting out of her blouse—
Shut it Dandelion.
I happened to bump against her by accident on the road the poet dreamed on. A thigh I tell you like marble. Methinks you werent bored during that month in Brokilon—
Milva who had just returned from her patrol heard his theatrical whispering and noticed their expressions.
Are you talking about me poet? What are you staring at as soon as my backs turned? Has a bird shat on me?
Were amazed by your archery skills. Dandelion grinned. You wouldnt find much competition at an archery tournament.
Yes yes Ive heard it all before and the rest.
Ive read Dandelion said winking tellingly at Geralt that the best archeresses can be found among the Zerrikanian steppe clans. I gather that some even cut off their left breast so it wont interfere when they draw the bow. Their breast they say gets in the way of the bowstring.
Some poet must have dreamed that up Milva snorted. He sits down and writes twaddle like that dipping his quill in a chamber pot and foolish people believe it. Think I use my tits to shoot with do you? You pull the bowstring back to your kisser standing side on like this. Nothing snags on the bowstring. All that talk of cutting off a tit is hogwash thought up by some layabout with nothing but womens bodies on the brain.
Thank you for your kind words about poets and poetry. And the archery lesson. Good weapon a bow. You know what? I think the arts of war will develop in that direction. People are going to fight at a distance in the wars of the future. Theyll invent a weapon with such a long range that the two sides will be able to kill each other while completely out of eyeshot.
Twaddle Milva said bluntly. A bows a good thing but wars all about man against man a swords length apart the stouter one smashing the weaker ones head in. Thats how its always been and thats how itll always be. And once that finishes all wars will finish. But for now youve seen how wars are fought. You saw it in that village by the causeway. And thats enough idle talk. Im going to have another look around. The horses are snorting as though a wolf was sniffing around…
Comely oh yes. Dandelion followed her with his gaze. Mmm… Going back to the village by the causeway and what she told you when we were sitting on the cliff—Dont you think theres something in what she says?
About?
About… Ciri the poet stammered slightly. Our beautiful sharp-shooting wench seems not to understand the relationship between you and Ciri and thinks it seems to me that you intend to woo her away from the Nilfgaardian Imperator. That thats the real motive behind your expedition to Nilfgaard.
So in that regard shes totally wrong. But whats she right about?
Take it easy keep your cool. Nonetheless stare the truth in the face. You took Ciri under your wing and consider yourself her guardian but shes no ordinary girl. Shes a princess Geralt. Without beating about the bush shes in line for the throne. For the palace. And the crown. Maybe not necessarily the Nilfgaardian crown. I dont know if Emhyr is the best husband for her—
Precisely. You dont know.
And do you?
The Witcher wrapped himself up in a blanket.
Youre heading quite naturally towards a conclusion he said. But dont bother; I know what youre thinking. Theres no point saving Ciri from a fate shes been doomed to since the day of her birth. Because Ciri who doesnt need saving at all will be quite ready to order the imperial guard to throw us down the stairs. Lets forget about her. Right?
Dandelion opened his mouth but Geralt didnt let him speak.
 After all he continued in an even harsher voice the girl wasnt abducted by a dragon or an evil wizard nor did pirates seize her for the ransom money. Shes not locked in a tower a dungeon or a cage; shes not being tortured or starved. Quite the opposite; she sleeps on damask eats from silverware wears silks and lace is bedecked with jewellery and is just waiting to be crowned. In short shes happy. Meanwhile some witcher who by some unfortunate fate happened upon her has taken it upon himself to disrupt spoil destroy and crush that happiness beneath the rotten old boots he pulled off some dead elf. Right?
Thats not what I was thinking Dandelion muttered.
He wasnt talking to you Milva said suddenly looming up from the darkness and after a moments hesitation sitting down beside the Witcher. That was for me. It was my words that upset him. I spoke in anger without thinking… Forgive me Geralt. I know what its like when a claw scratches an open wound. Come on dont fret. I wont do it any more. Do you forgive me? Or should I say sorry by kissing you?
Not waiting either for an answer or permission she grabbed him powerfully by the neck and kissed him on the cheek. He squeezed her shoulder hard.
Slide nearer. He coughed. And you too Dandelion. Well be warmer together.
They said nothing for a long time. Clouds scudded across a sky bright with firelight obscuring the twinkling stars.
I want to tell you something Geralt said at last. But promise you wont laugh.
Out with it.
I had some strange dreams. In Brokilon. At first I thought they were ravings; something wrong with my head. You know I got a good beating on Thanedd. But I keep having the same dream. Always the same one.
Dandelion and Milva said nothing.
Ciri he began a moment later isnt sleeping in a palace beneath a brocade canopy. Shes riding a horse through a dusty village… the villagers are pointing at her. Theyre calling her by a name I dont recognise. Dogs are barking. Shes not alone. There are others with her. Theres a crop-haired girl whos holding Ciris hand… and Ciris smiling at her but I dont like that smile. I dont like her heavy make-up… But the thing I like least is that she leaves a trail of death.
So where is the girl? Milva mused snuggling up to him like a cat. Not in Nilfgaard?
I dont know he said with difficulty. But Ive had the same dream several times. The problem is I dont believe in dreams like that.
Well youre a fool. I do.
I dont know it he repeated. But I can feel it. Theres fire ahead of her and death behind her. I have to make haste.
It began to rain at dawn. Not like the previous day when the storm had been accompanied by a brief but strong downpour. The sky turned grey and took on a leaden patina. It began to spit with rain; a fine even and drenching drizzle.
They rode east. Milva led the way. When Geralt pointed out to her that the Yaruga was to the south the archer growled and reminded him she was the guide and knew what she was doing. He said nothing after that. After all the most important thing was that they were under way. The direction wasnt so important.
They rode in silence wet chilled to the bone and hunched over their saddles. They kept to footpaths stole along forest tracks cut across highways. They disappeared into the undergrowth at the sound of thudding hooves of cavalry tramping along the roads. They gave a wide berth to the uproar of battle. They rode past villages engulfed in flames past smoking and glowing rubble and past settlements and hamlets which had been razed to black squares of burnt earth and the acrid stench of rain-soaked charred embers. They startled flocks of crows feeding on corpses. They passed groups and columns of peasants bent beneath bundles fleeing from war and conflagration dazed responding to questions with nothing but a fearful uncomprehending and mute raising of their eyes emptied by misfortune and horror.
They rode east amidst fire and smoke amidst drizzle and fog and the tapestry of war unfolded in front of their eyes. So many sights.
There was a black silhouette of a crane projecting among the ruins of a burnt-out village with a naked corpse dangling from it head downwards. Blood from the mutilated crotch and belly dripped down onto its chest and face to hang like icicles from its hair. The Rune of Ard was visible on its back. Carved with a knife.
Angivare Milva said throwing her wet hair off her neck. The Squirrels were here.
What does angivare mean?
Informer.
There was a grey horse saddled in a black caparison. It was walking unsteadily around the edge of the battlefield wandering between piles of corpses and broken spears stuck into the ground whinnying quietly and pitifully dragging its entrails behind it dangling from its mutilated belly. They couldnt finish it off for on the battlefield–apart from the horse–there were also marauders robbing corpses.
There was a spread-eagled girl lying near a burnt-out farmyard naked bloody staring at the sky with glazed eyes.
They say wars a male thing Milva growled. But they have no mercy on women; they have to have their fun. Fucking heroes; damn them all.
Youre right. But you wont change it.
I already have. I ran away from home. I didnt want to sweep the cottage and scrub the floors. I wasnt going to wait until they arrived and put the cottage to the torch spread me out on the very same floor and… She broke off and spurred her horse forward.
And later there was a tar house. Here Dandelion puked up everything hed eaten that day: some hard tack and half a stockfish.
In the tar house some Nilfgaardians–or perhaps Scoiatael–had dealt with a group of captives. It was impossible even to guess at the exact size of the group. Because during the carnage they had not only used arrows swords and lances but also woodmens tools theyd found there: axes drawknives and crosscut saws.
There were other scenes of war but Geralt Dandelion and Milva didnt remember them. They had discarded them from their memories.
They had become indifferent.
Over the next two days they didnt even cover twenty miles. It continued to rain. The earth absorbent after the summer drought sucked up water like a sponge and the forest tracks were transformed into muddy slides. Fog and haze prevented them from spotting the smoke from fires but the stench of burning buildings told them the armies were still close at hand and were still setting light to anything that would catch fire.
They didnt see any fugitives. They were alone in the forest. Or so they thought.
Geralt was the first to hear the snorting of the horse following in their tracks. With a stony countenance he turned Roach back. Dandelion opened his mouth but Milva gestured him to remain silent and removed her bow from where it hung by her saddle.
The rider following them emerged from the brush. He saw they were waiting for him and reined back his horse a chestnut colt. They stood in a silence broken only by the beating of the rain.
I forbade you from riding after us the Witcher finally said.
The Nilfgaardian whom Dandelion had last seen lying in a coffin looked down at his horses wet mane. The poet barely recognised him as he was now dressed in a hauberk leather tunic and cloak no doubt stripped from one of the horsemen killed by the wagon. However he remembered the young face which hadnt grown much more stubble since the adventure under the beech tree.
I forbade it the Witcher repeated.
You did the young man finally agreed. He spoke without a Nilfgaardian accent. But I must.
Geralt dismounted handing the reins to the poet. And drew his sword.
Get down he said calmly. Youve equipped yourself with some hardware I see. Good. There was no way I could kill you then while you were unarmed. Now its different. Dismount.
Im not fighting you. I dont want to.
So I imagine. Like all your fellow countrymen you prefer another kind of fight. Like in that tar house which you must have ridden past following our trail. Dismount I said.
I am Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach.
I didnt ask you to introduce yourself. I ordered you to dismount.
I will not. I dont want to fight you.
Milva. The Witcher nodded at the archer. Be so kind as to shoot his horse from under him.
No! the Nilfgaardian raised an arm before Milva had time to nock her arrow. Please dont. Im dismounting.
Thats better. Now draw your sword son.
The young man folded his arms across his chest.
Kill me if you want. If you prefer order the she-elf to shoot me. Im not fighting you. I am Cahir Mawr Dyffryn… son of Ceallach. I want… I want to join you.
I must have misheard. Say that again.
I want to join you. Youre riding to search for the girl. I want to help you. I have to help you.
Hes a madman. Geralt turned to Milva and Dandelion. Hes taken leave of his senses. Were dealing with a madman.
Hed suit the company muttered Milva. Hed suit it perfectly.
Think his proposition over Geralt Dandelion mocked. After all hes a Nilfgaardian nobleman. Perhaps with his help itll be easier for us to get to—
Keep your tongue in check the Witcher interrupted the poet sharply. As I said draw your sword Nilfgaardian.
I am not going to fight. And I am not a Nilfgaardian. I come from Vicovaro and my name is—
Im not interested in your name. Draw your weapon.
No.
Witcher. Milva leant down from the saddle and spat on the ground. Times flying and the rains falling. The Nilfgaardian doesnt want to fight and although youre pulling a stern face you wont cut him to pieces in cold blood. Do we have to hang about here all fucking day? Ill stick an arrow in his chestnuts underbelly and lets be on our way. He wont catch up on foot.
Cahir son of Ceallach was by his chestnut colt in one bound jumped into the saddle and galloped back the way hed come yelling at his steed to go faster. The Witcher watched him riding off for a moment then mounted Roach. In silence. Without looking back.
Im getting old he mumbled some time later after Roach had caught up with Milvas black. Im starting to develop scruples.
Aye it can happen with old uns said the archer looking at him in sympathy. A decoction of lungwort can help. But for now put a cushion on your saddle.
Scruples Dandelion explained gravely are not the same as piles Milva. Youre confusing the terms.
Who could understand your smart-arsed chatter? You never stop jabbering its the only thing you know! Come on lets ride!
Milva the Witcher asked a moment later protecting his face from the rain which stabbed against it as they galloped. Would you have killed the horse under him?
No she confessed reluctantly. The horse hadnt done anything. But that Nilfgaardian—Why in hell is he stalking us? Why does he say he has to?
Devil take me if I know.
It was still raining when the forest suddenly came to an end and they rode onto a highway winding between the hills from the south to the north. Or the other way around depending on your point of view. What they saw on the highway didnt surprise them. They had already seen similar sights. Overturned and gutted wagons dead horses scattered bundles saddlebags and baskets. And ragged shapes which not long before had been people frozen into strange poses.
They rode closer without fear because it was apparent that the slaughter had not taken place that day. They had come to recognise such things; or perhaps to sense them with a purely animalistic instinct which the last days had awoken and sharpened in them. They had also learned to search through battlefields because occasionally–though not often–they had managed to find a little food or a sack of fodder among the scattered objects.
They stopped by the last wagon of a devastated column. It had been pushed into the ditch and was resting on the hub of a shattered wheel. Beneath the wagon lay a stout woman with an unnaturally twisted neck. The collar of her tunic was covered with rain-washed streaks of coagulated blood from her torn ear from which an earring had been ripped. The sign on the tarpaulin pulled over the wagon read: Vera Loewenhaupt and Sons. There was no sign of the sons.
They werent peasants Milva said through pursed lips. They were traders. They came from the south wending from Dillingen towards Brugge and were caught here. Its not good Witcher. I thought we could turn south at this point but now I truly have no idea what to do. Dillingen and the whole of Brugge is sure to be in Nilfgaardian hands so we wont make it to the Yaruga this way. Well have to go east through Turlough. There are forests and wildernesses there the army wont go that way.
Im not going any further east Geralt protested. I have to get to the Yaruga.
Youll get there she replied unexpectedly calm. But by a safer route. If we head south from here youll fall right into the Nilfgaardians jaws. You wont gain anything.
Ill gain time he snapped by heading east Im just wasting it. I told you I cant afford to—
Quiet Dandelion said suddenly steering his horse around. Be quiet for a moment.
What is it?
I can hear… singing.
The Witcher shook his head. Milva snorted.
Youre hearing things poet.
Quiet! Shut up! Im telling you someones singing! Cant you hear it?
Geralt lowered his hood; Milva also strained to listen and a moment later glanced at the Witcher and nodded silently.
The troubadours musical ear hadnt let him down. What had seemed impossible turned out to be true. Here they were standing in the middle of a forest in the drizzle on a road strewn with corpses and they could hear singing. Someone was approaching from the south singing jauntily and gaily.
Milva tugged the reins of her black ready to flee but the Witcher gestured to her to wait. He was curious. Because the singing they could hear wasnt the menacing rhythmic booming massed singing of marching infantry nor a swaggering cavalry song. The singing which was becoming louder all the time didnt arouse any anxiety.
Quite the opposite.
The rain drummed on the foliage. They began to make out the words of the song. It was a merry song which seemed strange unnatural and totally out of place in this landscape of death and war.
Look how the wolf dances in the holt.
Teeth bared tail waving leaping like a colt.
Oh why does he prance like one bewitched?
The frolicking beast simply hasnt been hitched!
Oom-pah oom-pah oom-pah-pah!
Dandelion suddenly laughed took his lute from under his wet mantle and–ignoring the hissing from the Witcher and Milva–strummed the strings and joined in at the top of his voice:
Look how the wolf is dragging his paws.
Head drooping tail hanging clenching his jaws.
Oh why is the beast in such a sorry state?
Hes either proposed or hes married his mate!
Ooh-hoo-ha! came the roared response from many voices close by.
Thunderous laughter burst out then someone whistled piercingly through their fingers after which a strange but colourful company came walking around a bend in the highway marching in single file splashing mud with rhythmic steps of their heavy boots.
Dwarves Milva said under her breath. But they arent Scoiatael. They dont have plaited beards.
There were six of them dressed in short hooded capes shimmering with countless shades of grey and brown the kind which were usually worn by dwarves in foul weather. Capes like that as Geralt knew had the quality of being totally waterproof which was achieved by the impregnation of wood tar over many years not to mention dust from the highway and the remains of greasy food. These practical garments passed from fathers to oldest sons; as a result they were used exclusively by mature dwarves. And a dwarf attains maturity when his beard reaches his waist which usually occurs at the age of fifty-five.
None of the approaching dwarves looked young. But none looked old either.
Theyre leading some humans muttered Milva indicating to Geralt with a movement of her head a small group emerging from the forest behind the company of dwarves who must be fugitives because theyre laden down with goods and chattels.
The dwarves arent exactly travelling light themselves Dandelion added.
Indeed each dwarf was heaving a load that many humans and horses would soon have collapsed under. In addition to the ordinary sacks and saddlebags Geralt noticed iron-bound chests a large copper cauldron and something that looked like a small chest of drawers. One of them was even carrying a cartwheel on his back.
The one walking at the front wasnt carrying anything. He had a small battle-axe in his belt on his back was a long sword in a scabbard wrapped in tabby cat skins and on his shoulder sat a green parrot with wet ruffled feathers. The dwarf addressed them.
Greetings! he roared after coming to a halt in the middle of the road and putting his hands on his hips. These days its better to meet a wolf in the forest than a human. And if you do have such bad luck youre more likely to be greeted with an arrow in the chest than a kind word! But whoever greets someone with a song or music must be a sound fellow! Or a sound wench; my apologies to the good lady! Greetings. Im Zoltan Chivay.
Im Geralt the Witcher introduced himself after a moments hesitation. The singer is Dandelion. And this is Milva.
Kin ell! the parrot squawked.
Shut your beak Zoltan Chivay growled at the bird. Excuse me. This foreign bird is clever but vulgar. I paid ten thalers for the freak. Hes called Field Marshal Windbag. And while Im at it this is the rest of my party. Munro Bruys Yazon Varda Caleb Stratton Figgis Merluzzo and Percival Schuttenbach.
Percival Schuttenbach wasnt a dwarf. From beneath his wet hood instead of a matted beard stuck out a long pointed nose unerringly identifying its owner as one of the old and noble race of gnomes.
And those Zoltan Chivay said pointing at the small group of humans who had stopped and were huddled together are fugitives from Kernow. As you can see theyre women and children. There were more but Nilfgaard seized them and their fellows three days ago put some of them to the sword and scattered the others. We came across them in the forest and now were travelling together.
Its bold of you the Witcher ventured to be marching along the highway singing as you go.
I dont reckon the dwarf said wiggling his beard that weeping as we go would be any better. Weve been marching through the woods since Dillingen quietly and out of sight and after the army passed we joined the highway to make up time. He broke off and looked around the battlefield.
Weve grown accustomed to sights like this he said pointing at the corpses. Beyond Dillingen and the Yaruga theres nothing but dead bodies on the roads… Were you with this lot?
No. Nilfgaard put some traders to the sword.
Not Nilfgaard said the dwarf shaking his head and looking at the dead with an indifferent expression. Scoiatael. The regular army dont bother pulling arrows out of corpses. And a good arrowhead costs half a crown.
He knows his prices Milva muttered.
Where are you headed?
South Geralt answered immediately.
I advise you against it Zoltan Chivay said and shook his head again. Its sheer hell fire and slaughter there. Dillingen is taken for sure the Nilfgaardians are crossing the Yaruga in greater and greater numbers; any moment now theyll flood the whole valley on the right bank. As you see theyre also in front of us to the north. Theyre heading for the city of Brugge. So the only sensible direction to escape is east.
Milva glanced knowingly at the Witcher who refrained from comment.
And thats where were headed; east Zoltan Chivay continued. The only chance is to hide behind the frontline and wait until the Temerian Army finally start out from the River Ina in the east. Then we plan to march along forest tracks until we reach the hills. Turlough then the Old Road to the River Chotla in Sodden which flows into the Ina. We can travel together if you wish. If it doesnt bother you that we make slow progress. Youre mounted and I realise our refugees slow the pace down.
It doesnt seem to bother you though Milva said looking at him intently. A dwarf even fully laden can march thirty miles a day. Almost the same as a mounted human. I know the Old Road. Without those refugees youd reach the Chotla in about three days.
They are women and children Zoltan Chivay said sticking out his beard and his belly. We wont leave them to their fate. Would you suggest we do anything else eh?
No the Witcher said. No we wouldnt.
Im pleased to hear it. That means my first impressions didnt deceive me. So whats it to be? Do we march as one company?
Geralt looked at Milva and the archer nodded.
Very well Zoltan Chivay said noticing the nod. So lets head off before some raiding party chances upon us on the highway. But first—Yazon Munro search the wagons. If you find anything useful there get it stowed away and pronto. Figgis check if our wheel fits that little wagon itll be just right for us.
It fits! yelled the one whod been lugging the cartwheel. Like it was made for it!
You see muttonhead? And you were so surprised when I made you take that wheel and carry it! Put it on! Help him Caleb!
In an impressively short time the wagon of the dead Vera Loewenhaupt had been equipped with a new wheel stripped of its tarpaulin and inessential elements and pulled out of the ditch and onto the road. All their goods were heaved onto it in an instant. After some thought Zoltan Chivay also ordered the children to be loaded onto the wagon. The instruction was carried out reluctantly; Geralt noticed that the childrens mothers scowled at the dwarves and tried to keep their distance from them.
With visible distaste Dandelion watched two dwarves trying on articles of clothing removed from some corpses. The remaining dwarves rummaged around among the wagons but didnt consider anything to be worth taking. Zoltan Chivay whistled through his fingers signalling that the time for looting was over and then he looked over Roach Pegasus and Milvas black with an expert eye.
Saddle horses he said wrinkling his nose in disapproval. In other words: useless. Figgis and Caleb to the shaft. Well be hauling in turn. Maaaaarch!
Geralt was certain the dwarves would quickly discard the wagon the moment it got well and truly stuck in soft boggy ground but he was mistaken. They were as strong as oxen and the forest tracks leading east turned out to be grassy and not too swampy even though it continued to rain without letting up. Milva became gloomy and grumpy and only broke her silence to express the conviction that the horses softened hooves would split at any moment. Zoltan Chivay licked his lips in reply examined the hooves in question and declared himself a master at roasting horsemeat which infuriated Milva.
They kept to the same formation the core of which was formed by the wagon hauled on a shift system. Zoltan marched in front of the wagon. Next to him on Pegasus rode Dandelion bantering with the parrot. Geralt and Milva rode behind them and at the back trudged the six women from Kernow.
The leader was usually Percival Schuttenbach the long-nosed gnome. No match for the dwarves in terms of height or strength he was their equal in stamina and considerably superior in agility. During the march he never stopped roaming around and rummaging in bushes; then he would pull ahead and disappear only to appear and with nervous monkey-like gestures signal from a considerable distance away that everything was in order and that they could continue. Occasionally he would return and give a rapid report about the obstacles on the track. Whenever he did he would have a handful of blackberries nuts or strange–but clearly tasty–roots for the four children sitting on the wagon.
Their pace was frightfully slow and they spent three days marching along forest tracks. They didnt happen upon any soldiers; they saw no smoke or the glow of fires. They were not alone however. Every so often Percival spotted groups of fugitives hiding in the forests. They passed several such groups hurriedly because the expressions of the peasants armed with pitchforks and stakes didnt encourage them to try to make friends. There was nonetheless a suggestion to try to negotiate and leave the women from Kernow with one of the groups but Zoltan was against it and Milva backed him up. The women were in no hurry at all to leave the company either. This was all the stranger since they treated the dwarves with such obvious fearful aversion and reserve hardly ever spoke and kept out of the way during every stop.
Geralt ascribed the womens behaviour to the tragedy they had experienced a short time before although he suspected that their aversion may have been due to the dwarves casual ways. Zoltan and his company cursed just as filthily and frequently as the parrot called Field Marshal Windbag but had a wider repertoire. They sang dirty songs which Dandelion enthusiastically joined in with. They spat blew their noses on their fingers and gave thunderous farts which usually prompted laughs jokes and competition. They only went into the bushes for major bodily needs; with the minor ones they didnt even bother moving very far away. This finally enraged Milva who gave Zoltan a good telling-off when one morning he pissed on the still warm ashes of the campfire totally oblivious to his audience. Having been dressed down Zoltan was unperturbed and announced that shamefully concealing that kind of activity was only common among two-faced perfidious people who were likely to be informers and could be identified as such by doing just that. This eloquent explanation made no impression on the archer. The dwarves were treated to a rich torrent of abuse with several very specific threats which was effective since they all obediently began to go into the bushes. To avoid laying themselves open to the appellation of perfidious informers however they went in a group.
The new company nevertheless changed Dandelion utterly. He got on famously with the dwarves particularly when it turned out that some of them had heard of him and even knew his ballads and couplets. Dandelion dogged Zoltans company. He wore a quilted jacket he had weaselled out of the dwarves and his crumpled hat with a feather was replaced by a swashbuckling marten-fur cap. He sported a broad belt with brass studs into which he had stuck a cruel-looking knife he had been given. This knife pricked him in the side each time he tried to lean over. Fortunately he quickly mislaid it and wasnt given another.
They wandered through the dense forests covering the hillsides of Turlough. The forests seemed deserted; there were no traces of any wild animals for they had apparently been frightened away by the armies and fugitives. There was nothing to hunt but they werent immediately threatened by hunger. The dwarves were lugging along a large quantity of provisions. As soon as they were finished however–and that occurred quickly because there were many mouths to feed–Yazon Varda and Munro Bruys vanished soon after dark taking an empty sack with them. When they returned at dawn they had two sacks both full. In one was fodder for the horses in the other barley groats flour beef jerky an almost entire cheese and even a huge haggis: a delicacy in the form of a pigs stomach stuffed with offal and pressed between two slats the whole resembling a pair of bellows.
Geralt guessed where the haul had come from. He didnt comment right away but bided his time until a moment when he was alone with Zoltan and then asked him politely if he saw nothing indecent in robbing other fugitives who were no less hungry than them after all and fighting for survival just like them. The dwarf answered gravely that indeed he was very ashamed of it but unfortunately such was his character.
Unbridled altruism is a huge vice of mine he explained. I simply have to do good. I am a sensible dwarf however and know that Im unable to do everyone good. Were I to attempt to be good to everyone to the entire world and to all the creatures living in it it would be a drop of fresh water in the salt sea. In other words a wasted effort. Thus I decided to do specific good; good which would not go to waste. Im good to myself and my immediate circle.
Geralt asked no further questions.
At one of the camps Geralt and Milva chatted at length with Zoltan Chivay the incorrigible and compulsive altruist. The dwarf was well informed about how the military activities were proceeding. At least he gave that impression.
The attack he said frequently quietening down Field Marshal Windbag who was screeching obscenities came from Drieschot and began at dawn on the seventh day after Lammas. Nilfgaard marched with its allies the Verdenian Army since Verden as you know is now an imperial protectorate. They moved swiftly putting all the villages beyond Drieschot to the torch and wiping out the Bruggian Army which was garrisoned there. The Nilfgaardian infantry marched on the fortress in Dillingen from the other side of the Yaruga. They crossed the river in a totally unexpected place. They built a pontoon bridge. Only took them half a day can you believe it?
Its possible to believe anything muttered Milva. Were you in Dillingen when it started?
Thereabouts the dwarf replied evasively. When news of the attack reached us we were already on the way to the city of Brugge. The highway was an awful shambles it was teeming with fugitives some of them fleeing from the south to the north others from the north to the south. They jammed up the highway so we got stuck. And Nilfgaard as it turned out were both behind us and in front of us. The forces that had left Drieschot must have split up. I reckon a large cavalry troop had headed north-east towards Brugge.
So the Nilfgaardians are already north of Turlough. It appears were stuck between two forces right in the middle. And safe.
Right in the middle yes the dwarf agreed. But not safe. The imperial troops are flanked by the Squirrels Verdenian volunteers and various mercenaries who are even worse than the Nilfgaardians. It was them as burnt down Kernow and almost seized us later; we barely managed to leg it into the woods. So we shouldnt poke our noses out of the forest. And we should remain on guard. Well make it to the Old Road then downstream by the River Chotla to the Ina and at the Ina were sure to bump into the Temerian Army. King Foltests men must have shaken off their surprise and begun standing up to the Nilfgaardians.
If only Milva said looking at the Witcher. But the problem is that urgent and important matters are driving us on to the south. We pondered heading south from Turlough towards the Yaruga.
I dont know what matters are driving you to those parts Zoltan said glowering suspiciously at them. They must indeed be greatly urgent and important to risk your necks for them.
He paused and waited but neither of them was in a hurry to explain. The dwarf scratched his backside hawked and spat.
It wouldnt surprise me he said finally if Nilfgaard had both banks of the Yaruga right up to the mouth of the Ina in their grasp. And where exactly on the Yaruga do you need to be?
Nowhere specific Geralt decided to reply. As long as we reach the river. I want to take a boat up to the delta.
Zoltan looked at him and laughed. Then stopped immediately when he realised it hadnt been a joke.
I have to admit he said a moment later youve got quite some route in mind. But get rid of those pipe dreams. The whole of south Brugge is in flames. Theyll impale you before you reach the Yaruga or drive you to Nilfgaard in fetters. However were you by some miracle to reach the river thered be no chance of sailing to the delta. That pontoon bridge spanning the river from Cintra to the Bruggian bank? They guard it day and night; nothing could get through that part of the river except perhaps a salmon. Your urgent and important matters will have to lose their urgency and importance. You havent got a prayer. Thats how I see it.
Milvas glance testified that she shared his opinion. Geralt didnt comment. He felt terrible. The slowly healing bone in his left forearm and his right knee still gnawed with the invisible fangs of a dull nagging pain made worse by effort and the constant damp. He was also being troubled by overwhelming disheartening exceptionally unpleasant feelings alien feelings he had never experienced before and was unable to deal with.
Helplessness and resignation.
After two days it stopped raining and the sun came out. The forests breathed forth mists and quickly dissipating fog and birds began to vigorously make up for the silence forced on them by the constant rain. Zoltan cheered up and ordered a long break after which he promised a quicker march and that they would reach the Old Road in a day at most.
The women from Kernow draped all the surrounding branches with the black and grey of drying clothing and then dressed only in their shifts hid shamefacedly in the bushes and prepared food. The children charged around naked disturbing the dignified calm of the steaming forest in elaborate ways. Dandelion slept off his tiredness. Milva vanished.
The dwarves took their rest seriously. Figgis Merluzzo and Munro Bruys went off hunting mushrooms. Zoltan Yazon Varda Caleb Stratton and Percival Schuttenbach sat down near the wagon and without taking a breather played Barrel their favourite card game which they devoted every spare minute to including the previous wet evenings.
The Witcher occasionally sat down to join them and watch them play as he did during this break. He was still unable to understand the complicated rules of this typical dwarven game but was fascinated by the amazing intricate workmanship of the cards and the drawings of the figures. Compared to the cards humans played with the dwarves cards were genuine works of art. Geralt was once again convinced that the advanced technology of the bearded folk was not limited to the fields of mining and metallurgy. The fact that in this specific card-playing field the dwarves talents hadnt helped them to monopolise the market was because cards were still less popular among humans than dice and human gamblers attached little importance to aesthetics. Human card players whom the Witcher had had several opportunities to observe always played with greasy cards so dirty that before cards were placed on the table they had to be laboriously peeled away from the fingers. The court cards were painted so carelessly that distinguishing the lady from the knave was only possible because the knave was mounted on a horse. Which actually looked more like a crippled weasel.
Mistakes of that kind were impossible with the dwarves cards. The crowned king was really regal the lady comely and curvaceous and the halberd-wielding knave jauntily moustachioed. The colour cards were called in Dwarven Speech the hraval vaina and ballet but Zoltan and company used the Common Speech and human names when they played.
The sun shone warmly the forest steamed and Geralt watched.
The fundamental principle of dwarven Barrel was something resembling an auction at a horse fair both in its intensity and the volume of the bidders voices. The pair declaring the highest price would endeavour to win as many tricks as possible which the rival pair had to impede at all costs. The game was played noisily and heatedly and a sturdy staff lay beside each player. These staffs were seldom used to beat an opponent but were often brandished.
Look what youve done! You plonker! You bonehead! Why did you open with spades instead of hearts? Think I was leading hearts just for the fun of it? Why I ought to take my staff and knock some sense into you!
I had four spades up to the knave so I was planning to make a good contract!
Four spades course you did! Including your own member which you counted when you looked down at your cards. Use your loaf Stratton were not at university! Were playing cards here! And remember that when the fool has the cards and doesnt blunder hell even beat the sage by thunder. Deal Varda.
Contract in diamonds.
A small slam in diamonds!
The king led diamonds but lost his crown fled the kingdom with his trousers down. A double in spades!
Barrel!
Wake up Caleb. That was a double with a Barrel! What are you bidding?
A big slam in diamonds!
No bid. Aaagh! What now? No ones Barrelling? Chickened out laddies? Youre leading Varda. Percival if you wink at him again Ill whack you so hard in the kisser your eyesll be screwed up till next winter.
Knave.
Lady!
And the king on the lady! The ladys shafted! Ill take her and ha ha Ive got another heart kept for a rainy day! Knave a ten and another—
And a trump! If you cant play a trump youd better take a dump. And diamonds! Zoltan? Grabbed you where it hurts!
Do you see him fucking gnome. Pshaw Im gonna take my staff to him…
Before Zoltan could use his stick a piercing cry was heard from the forest.
Geralt was the first to his feet. He swore as he ran pain shooting through his knee. Zoltan Chivay rushed after him seizing his sword wrapped in tabby cat skins from the wagon. Percival Schuttenbach and the rest of the dwarves ran after them armed with sticks while Dandelion whod been woken by the screaming brought up the rear. Figgis and Munro leapt out of the forest from one side. Throwing down their baskets of mushrooms the two dwarves gathered up the scattering children and pulled them away. Milva appeared from nowhere drawing an arrow from her quiver while running and showing the Witcher where the scream had come from. There was no need. Geralt saw and heard and now knew what it was all about.
One of the children was screaming. She was a freckled little girl with plaits aged about nine. She stood petrified a few paces from a pile of rotten logs. Geralt was with her in an instant. He seized her under the arms interrupting her terrified shrieking and watched the movement among the logs out of the corner of his eye. He quickly withdrew and bumped into Zoltan and his dwarves. Milva who had also seen something moving nocked her arrow and took aim.
Dont shoot Geralt hissed. Get this kid out of here fast. And you get back. But nice and easy. Dont make any sudden movements.
At first it seemed to them that the movement had come from one of the rotten logs as though it was intending to crawl out of the sunlit woodpile and look for shade among the trees. It was only when they looked closer that they saw features which were atypical for a log: in particular four pairs of thin legs with knobbly joints sticking up from the furrowed speckled segmented crayfish-like shell.
Easy does it Geralt said quietly. Dont provoke it. Dont let its apparent sluggishness deceive you. It isnt aggressive but it moves like lightning. If it feels threatened it may attack and theres no antidote for its venom.
The creature slowly crawled onto a log. It looked at the humans and the dwarves slowly turning its eyes which were set on stalks. It was barely moving. It cleaned the ends of its legs lifting them up one by one and carefully nibbling them with its impressive-looking sharp mandibles.
There was such an uproar Zoltan declared emotionlessly appearing beside the Witcher I thought it was something really worrying. Like a cavalryman from a Verdenian reserve troop. Or a military prosecutor. And what is it? Just an overgrown creepy-crawly. You have to admit nature takes on some pretty curious forms.
Not any longer Geralt replied. The thing thats sitting there is an eyehead. A creature of Chaos. A dying post-conjunction relic if you know what Im talking about.
Of course I do the dwarf said looking him in the eyes. Although Im not a witcher nor an authority on Chaos and creatures like that. Well Im very curious to see what the Witcher will do with this post-conjunction relic. Or to be more precise Im wondering how the Witcher will do it. Will you use your sword or do you prefer my sihil?
Nice weapon Geralt said glancing at the sword which Zoltan had drawn from its lacquered scabbard wrapped in tabby cat skins. But it wont be necessary.
Interesting Zoltan repeated. So are we just going to stand here looking at each other? Just wait until that relic feels threatened? Or should we withdraw and ask some Nilfgaardians for help? What do you suggest monster slayer?
Fetch the ladle and the cauldron lid from the wagon.
What?
Dont question his authority Zoltan Dandelion chipped in.
Percival Schuttenbach scurried off to the wagon and soon returned with the requested objects. The Witcher winked at the company and then began to beat the ladle against the lid with all his strength.
Stop it! Stop it! Zoltan Chivay screamed a moment later covering his ears with his hands. Youll break the fucking ladle! The beasts run off! Hes gone for poxs sake!
Oh yes Percival said delighted. Did you see him? On my life he showed a clean pair of heels! Not that he has any!
The eyehead Geralt explained calmly handing back the slightly dented kitchen utensils to the dwarves has remarkably delicate sensitive hearing. It doesnt have any ears but hears so to speak with its entire body. In particular it cant bear metallic noises. It feels them as a pain…
Even in the arse Zoltan interrupted. I know because it pained me too when you started whacking that lid. If the monster has more sensitive hearing than I do he has my sympathy. Sure he wont be back? He wont rustle up some mates?
I dont imagine many of its mates are left on this earth. That specimen is certain not to be back in these parts for a long time. Theres nothing to be afraid of.
Im not going to talk about monsters the dwarf said looking glum. But your concerto for brass instruments must have been heard as far away as the Skellige Islands so its possible some music lovers might be heading this way. And wed better not be around when they come. Strike camp boys! Hey ladies get clad and count up the children! Were moving out and quickly!
When they stopped for the night Geralt decided to clear up a few issues. This time Zoltan Chivay hadnt sat down to play Barrel so there was no difficulty leading him away to a secluded place for a frank man-to-man conversation. He got straight to the point.
Out with it. How do you know Im a witcher?
The dwarf winked at him and smiled slyly.
I might boast about my perspicacity. I could say I noticed your eyes changing after dusk and in full sunlight. I could show that Im a dwarf-of-the-world and that Ive heard this and that about Geralt of Rivia. But the truth is much more banal. Dont scowl. You can keep things to yourself but your friend the bard sings and jabbers; he never shuts his trap. Thats how I know about your profession.
Geralt refrained from asking another question. And rightly so.
Its like this Zoltan continued. Dandelion told me everything. He must have sensed we value sincerity and after all he didnt have to sense our friendly disposition to you because we dont hide our dispositions. So in short: I know why youre in a hurry to go south. I know what important and urgent matters are taking you to Nilfgaard. I know who youre planning to seek. And not just from the poets gossip. I lived in Cintra before the war and I heard tales of the Child of Destiny and the white-haired witcher to whom the child was granted.
Geralt did not respond this time either.
The rest the dwarf said is just a question of observation. You let that crusty monstrosity go even though youre a witcher and its your professional duty to exterminate monsters like that. But the beast didnt do your Surprise any harm so you spared it and just drove it away by banging on a cauldron lid. Because youre no longer a witcher; youre a valiant knight who is hastening to rescue his kidnapped and oppressed maiden.
Why dont you stop glaring at me he added still not hearing an answer or an explanation. Youre constantly sniffing out treachery; fearful of how this secret–now its out–may turn against you. Dont fret. Were all going to the Ina helping each other supporting each other. The challenge you have in front of you is the same one we face: to survive and stay alive. In order for this noble mission to continue. Or live an ordinary life but so as not to be ashamed at the hour of death. You think youve changed. That the world has changed. But look; the worlds the same as its always been. Quite the same. And youre the same as you used to be. Dont fret.
But drop your idea about heading off alone Zoltan continued his monologue unperturbed by the Witchers silence and about a solo journey south through Brugge and Sodden to the Yaruga. Youll have to search for another way to Nilfgaard. If you want I can advise you—
Dont bother Geralt said rubbing his knee which had been hurting incessantly for several days. Dont bother Zoltan.
He found Dandelion watching the Barrel-playing dwarves. He took the poet by the sleeve and led him off to the forest. Dandelion realised at once what it was all about; one glance at the Witchers face was enough.
Babbler Geralt said quietly. Windbag. Bigmouth. I ought to shove your tongue in a vice you blockhead. Or put a bit between your teeth.
The troubadour said nothing but his expression was haughty.
When news got out that Id started to associate with you the Witcher continued some sensible people were surprised by our friendship. It astonished them that I let you travel with me. They advised me to abandon you in a desert to rob you strangle you throw you into a pit and bury you in dung. Indeed I regret I didnt follow their advice.
Is it such a secret who you are and what youre planning to do? Dandelion suddenly said losing his temper. Are we to keep the truth from everybody and pretend all the time? Those dwarves… Were all one company now…
I dont have a company the Witcher snapped. I dont have one and I dont want to have one. I dont need one. Do you get it?
Of course he gets it Milva said from behind him. And I get it too. You dont need anyone Witcher. You show it often enough.
Im not fighting a private war he said turning around suddenly. I dont need a company of daredevils because Im not going to Nilfgaard to save the world or to bring down an evil empire. Im going to get Ciri. And thats why I can go alone. Forgive me if that sounds unkind but the rest of it doesnt concern me. And now leave me. I want to be alone.
When he turned around a moment later he discovered that only Dandelion had walked away.
I had that dream again he said abruptly. Milva Im wasting time. Im wasting time! She needs me. She needs help.
Talk she said softly. Get it out. No matter how frightening it is get it out.
It wasnt frightening. In my dream… She was dancing. She was dancing in some smoky barn. And she was–hells bells–happy. There was music playing someone was yelling… The entire barn was shaking from shouting and music… And she was dancing dancing clicking her heels… And on the roof of that bloody barn in the cold night air… death was dancing too. Milva… Maria… She needs me.
Milva turned her face away.
Not just her she whispered. Quietly so he wouldnt hear.
At the next stop the Witcher demonstrated his interest in Zoltans sword the sihil which he had glanced at during the adventure with the eyehead. Without hesitation the dwarf unwrapped the weapon from its catskins and drew it from its lacquered scabbard.
The sword measured a little over three feet but didnt weigh much more than two pounds. The blade which was decorated along much of its length with mysterious runes had a bluish hue and was as sharp as a razor. In the right hands it could have been used to shave with. The twelve-inch hilt wound around with criss-crossed strips of lizard skin had a cylindrical brass cap instead of a spherical pommel and its crossguard was very small and finely crafted.
A fine piece of work Geralt said making a quick hissing moulinet followed by a thrust from the left and then a lightning transition to a high seconde parry and then laterally into prime. Indeed a nice bit of ironmongery.
Phew! Percival Schuttenbach snorted. Bit of ironmongery! Take a better look at it because youll be calling it a horseradish root next.
I had a better sword once.
I dont dispute that Zoltan said shrugging his shoulders. Because it was sure to have come from our forges. You witchers know how to wield a sword but you dont make them yourselves. Swords like that are only forged by dwarves in Mahakam under Mount Carbon.
Dwarves smelt the steel Percival added and forge the laminated blades. But its us the gnomes who do the finishing touches and the sharpening. In our workshops. Using our own gnomish technology as we once made our gwyhyrs the best swords in the world.
The sword I wield now Geralt said baring the blade comes from the catacombs of Craag An in Brokilon. It was given to me by the dryads. Its a first-class weapon but its neither dwarven nor gnomish. Its an elven blade at least one or maybe two hundred years old.
He doesnt know what hes talking about! the gnome called picking up the sword and running his fingers over it. The details are elven I give you that. The hilt crossguard and pommel. The etching engraving chasing and other decorative elements. But the blade was forged and sharpened in Mahakam. And its true that it was made several centuries ago because its obvious that the steel is mediocre and the workmanship primitive. Now hold Zoltans sihil against it; do you see the difference?
Yes I do. And I have the impression mines just as well made.
The gnome snorted and waved a hand. Zoltan smiled superciliously.
The blade he explained in a patronising voice should cut not make an impression and it shouldnt be judged on first impressions either. The point is that your sword is a typical composition of steel and iron while my sihils blade was forged from a refined alloy containing graphite and borax…
Its a modern technique! Percival burst out a little excited since the conversation was moving inevitably towards his field of expertise. The blades construction and composition numerous laminates in its soft core edged with hard–not soft–steel…
Take it easy the dwarf said reining him in. You wont make a metallurgist out of him Schuttenbach so dont bore him with details. Ill explain it in simple terms. Its incredibly difficult to sharpen good hard magnetite steel Witcher. Why? Because its hard! If you dont have the technology as we dwarves once did not and you humans still dont have but you want a sharp sword you forge soft steel edges which are more malleable onto a hardened core. Your Brokilonian sword is made using just such a simplified method. Modern dwarven blades are made the opposite way around: with a soft core and hard edges. The process is time-consuming and as I said demands advanced technology. But as a result you get a blade which will cut a batiste scarf tossed up in the air.
Is your sihil capable of a trick like that?
No The dwarf smiled. The swords sharpened to that degree are few and far between and not many of them ever left Mahakam. But I guarantee that the shell of that knobbly old crab wouldnt have put up much resistance against it. You could have sliced him up without breaking a sweat.
The discussion about swords and metallurgy continued for some time. Geralt listened with interest shared his own experiences added some extra information asked about this and that and then examined and tried out Zoltans sihil. He had no idea that the following day he would have the opportunity to add practice to the theory he had acquired.
The first indication that humans were living in the area was the neatly stacked cord of firewood standing among woodchips and tree bark by the track spotted by Percival Schuttenbach who was walking at the head of the column.
Zoltan stopped the procession and sent the gnome ahead to scout. Percival vanished and after half an hour hurried back excited and out of breath and gesticulating from a long way off. He reached them but instead of giving his report grabbed his long nose in his fingers and blew it powerfully making a sound resembling a shepherds horn.
Dont frighten away the game Zoltan Chivay barked. And talk. What lies ahead of us?
A settlement the gnome panted wiping his fingers on the tails of his many-pocketed kaftan. In a clearing. Three cottages a barn a few mud and straw huts… Theres a dog running around in the farmyard and the chimneys smoking. Someones preparing food there. Porridge. And made with milk.
You mean you went into the kitchen? Dandelion laughed. And peered into the pot? How do you know its porridge?
The gnome looked at him with an air of superiority and Zoltan snarled angrily.
Dont insult him poet. He can sniff out grub a mile away. If he says its porridge its porridge. Still I dont like the sound of this.
Whys that? I like the sound of porridge. Id be happy to try some.
Zoltans right Milva said. And you keep quiet Dandelion because this isnt poetry. If the porridge is made with milk that means theres a cow. And a peasant who sees fires burning will take his cow and disappear into the forest. Why didnt this one? Lets duck into the forest and give it a wide berth. Theres something fishy about this.
Not so fast not so fast the dwarf muttered. Therell be plenty of time to flee. Perhaps the wars over. Perhaps the Temerian Army has finally moved out. What do we know stuck in this forest? Perhaps the decisive battles over perhaps Nilfgaards been repulsed perhaps the fronts already behind us and the peasants are returning home with their cows. We ought to examine this and find out whats behind it. Figgis and Munro; you two stay here and keep your eyes peeled. Well do a bit of reconnaissance. If its safe Ill make a call like a sparrow hawk.
Like a sparrow hawk? said Munro Bruys anxiously moving his chin. Since when did you know anything about mimicking bird calls Zoltan?
Thats the whole point. If you hear a strange unrecognisable sound youll know its me. Percival lead on. Geralt will you come with us?
Well all go Dandelion said dismounting. If its a trap well be safer in a bigger group.
Ill leave you the Field Marshal Zoltan said removing the parrot from his shoulder and passing him to Figgis Merluzzo. This ugly bird might suddenly start effing and blinding at the top of his voice and then our silent approach will go to fuck. Lets go.
Percival quickly led them to the edge of the forest into dense elder shrubs. The ground fell away slightly beyond the shrubs where they saw a large pile of uprooted tree stumps. Beyond them there was a broad clearing. They peered out cautiously.
The gnomes account had been accurate. There really were three cottages a barn and several sod-roofed mud and straw huts in the middle of the clearing. A huge puddle of muck glistened in the farmyard. The buildings and a small untended plot were surrounded by a low partly fallen down fence on the other side of which a scruffy dog was barking. Smoke was rising from the roof of one of the cottages creeping lazily over the sunken turfs.
Indeed Zoltan whispered sniffing that smoke smells good. Particularly since my nostrils are used to the stench of burnt-down houses. There are no horses or guards around which is good because I bore in mind that some rabble might be resting up and cooking a meal here. Mmm Id say its safe.
Ill take a look volunteered Milva.
No the dwarf protested. You look too much like a Squirrel. If they see you they might get frit and humans can be unpredictable when theyre startled. Yazon and Caleb will go. But keep your bow at the ready; you can cover them if needs be. Percival leg it over to the others. You lot be prepared in case we have to sound the retreat.
Yazon Varda and Caleb Stratton cautiously left the thicket and headed towards the buildings. They walked slowly looking around intently.
The dog smelled them right away started barking furiously then ran around the farmyard not reacting to the dwarves clucking and whistling. The door to the cottage opened. Milva raised her bow and drew back the bowstring in a single movement. And then immediately slackened it.
A short stout girl with long plaits came rushing out. She shouted something waving her arms. Yazon Varda spread his arms and shouted something back. The girl continued to bawl something. They could hear the sound but were unable to make out what she was saying.
But the words must have reached Yazon and Caleb who made an about-turn and hurried back towards the elder shrubs. Milva drew her bow again and swept around with the arrowhead searching for a target.
What the devils going on? Zoltan rasped. Whats happening? What are they running away from? Milva?
Shut your trap the archer hissed still taking aim at each cottage and hut in turn. But she couldnt find anyone to shoot. The girl with the plaits disappeared into her cottage and shut the door behind her.
The dwarves were sprinting as though the Grim Reaper was on their heels. Yazon yelled something–or possibly cursed. Dandelion suddenly blanched.
Hes saying… Oh Gods!
What… Zoltan broke off for Yazon and Caleb had made it back red in the face. What is it? Spit it out!
The plague… Caleb gasped. Smallpox…
Did you touch anything? Zoltan Chivay asked stepping back nervously and almost knocking Dandelion over. Did you touch anything in the farmyard?
No… The dog wouldnt let us near…
May the fucking mutt be praised Zoltan said raising his eyes heavenwards. May the Gods give it a long life and a heap of bones higher than Mount Carbon. That girl the plump one did she have blisters?
No. Shes healthy. The infected ones are in the last cottage her in-laws. And a lot of people have already died she said. Blimey Zoltan the wind was blowing right towards us!
Thats enough teeth chattering Milva said lowering her bow. If you didnt touch any infected people youve got nothing to worry about. If its true what she says about the pox. Maybe the girl just wanted to scare you away.
No Yazon replied still breathing heavily. There was a pit behind the hut… with bodies in it. The girl doesnt have the strength to bury the dead so she throws them into the pit…
Well Zoltan said sniffing. Thats your porridge Dandelion. But Ive slightly lost my appetite for it. Lets get out of here; and fast.
The dog in the farmyard began barking again.
Get down the Witcher hissed dropping into a crouch.
A group of horsemen came riding out from a gap in the trees on the other side of the clearing. Whistling and whooping they circled the farmstead at a gallop and then burst into the yard. The riders were armed but werent in identical uniforms. Quite the contrary in fact–they were all dressed differently and haphazardly and their weaponry and tackle gave the impression of being assembled at random. And not in an armoury but on a battlefield.
Thirteen Percival Schuttenbach said making a quick tally.
Who are they?
Neither Nilfgaard nor any other regulars came Zoltans assessment. Not Scoiatael. I think theyre volunteers. A random mob.
Or marauders.
The horsemen were yelling and cavorting around the farmyard. One of them hit the dog with a spear shaft and it bolted. The girl with the plaits ran outside shouting. But this time her warning had no effect or wasnt taken seriously. One of the horseman galloped up seized the girl by one of her plaits pulled her away from the doorway and dragged her through the puddle of muck. The others jumped off their horses to assist the first dragging the girl to the end of the farmyard. They tore her shift off her and threw her down onto a pile of rotten straw. The girl fought back ferociously but she had no chance. Only one of the marauders didnt join in the fun; he guarded the horses which were tied to the fence. The girl gave a long piercing scream. Then a short pained one. They heard nothing after that.
Warriors! Milva said jumping to her feet. Fucking heroes!
They arent afraid of the pox Yazon Varda said shaking his head.
Fear Dandelion muttered is a human quality. Theres nothing human in them any longer.
Apart from their innards Milva rasped carefully nocking an arrow which I shall now prick.
Thirteen Zoltan Chivay repeated gravely. And theyre all mounted. Youll knock off one or two and the rest will have us surrounded. And anyway it might be an advance party. The devil knows what kind of bigger force they belong to.
Do you expect me to stand by and watch?
No Geralt said straightening his headband and the sword on his back. Ive had enough of standing by and watching. Im fed up with my own helplessness. But first we have to stop them from getting away. See the one holding the horses? When I get there knock him out of the saddle. And if you can take out another. But only when I get down there.
That leaves eleven the archer said turning to face him.
I can count.
Youve forgotten about the smallpox Zoltan Chivay muttered. If you go down there youll come back infected… Bollocks to that Witcher! Youre putting us all at risk… For fucks sake shes not the girl youre looking for!
Shut up Zoltan. Go back to the wagon and hide in the forest.
Im coming with you Milva declared hoarsely.
No. Cover me from here youll be helping more if you do that.
What about me? Dandelion asked. What should I do?
The same as usual. Nothing.
Youre insane… Zoltan snarled. Taking on the entire band? Whats got into you? Want to play the hero rescuing fair maidens?
Shut up.
Go to hell! No wait. Leave your sword. Theres a whole bunch of them so itd be better if you didnt have to swing twice. Take my sihil. One blow is enough.
The Witcher took the dwarfs weapon without a word or a moments hesitation. He pointed out the marauder guarding the horses one more time. And then hopped over the tree stumps and moved quickly towards the cottages.
The sun was shining. Grasshoppers scattered in front of him.
The man guarding the horses saw him and pulled a spear from its place by his saddle. He had very long unkempt hair falling onto a torn hauberk patched up with rusty wire. He was wearing brand-new–clearly stolen–boots with shiny buckles.
The guard yelled and another marauder appeared from behind the fence. He was carrying a sword slung from a belt around his neck and was just buttoning his britches. Geralt was quite close by now. He could hear the guffawing of the men amusing themselves with the girl on the pile of straw. He took some deep breaths and each one intensified his blood lust. He could have calmed himself down but didnt want to. He wanted to have some fun himself.
And who might you be? Stop! the long-haired man shouted hefting the spear in his hand. What do you want here?
Ive done enough standing and watching.
Whaaat?
Does the name Ciri mean anything to you?
Ill—
The marauder was unable to finish his sentence. A grey-fletched arrow hit him in the middle of his chest and threw him from the saddle. Before he hit the ground Geralt could hear the next arrow whistling. The second soldier caught the arrowhead in the abdomen low right between the hands buttoning up his fly. He howled like an animal bent double and lurched back against the fence knocking over and breaking some of the pickets.
Before the others had managed to come to their senses and pick up their weapons the Witcher was among them. The dwarven blade glittered and sang. There was a savage craving for blood in the song of the feather-light razor-sharp steel. The bodies and limbs offered almost no resistance. Blood splashed onto his face; he had no time to wipe it off.
Even if the marauders were thinking about putting up a fight the sight of falling corpses and blood gushing in streams effectively discouraged them. One of them who had his trousers around his knees since he hadnt even had time to pull them up was slashed in the carotid artery and tumbled onto his back comically swinging his still unsatisfied manhood. The second nothing but a stripling covered his head with both hands which the sihil severed at the wrists. The remaining men took flight dispersing in various directions. The Witcher pursued them softly cursing the pain that was once again pulsing through his knee. He hoped the leg wouldnt buckle under him.
He managed to pin two of them against the fence. They tried to defend themselves by holding up their swords. Paralysed by terror their defence was woeful. The Witchers face was once again spattered with blood from arteries slashed open by the dwarven blade. But the remaining men made use of the time and managed to get away; they were already mounted. One of then fell however hit by an arrow wriggling and squirming like a fish emptied from a net. The last two spurred their horses into a gallop. But only one of them managed to escape because Zoltan Chivay had suddenly appeared in the farmyard. The dwarf swung his axe around his head and threw it hitting one of the fleeing men in the centre of the back. The marauder screamed and tumbled from the saddle legs kicking. The last one pressed himself tight to his horses neck cleared the pit full of dead bodies and galloped towards the gap in the trees.
Milva! the Witcher and the dwarf both yelled.
The archer was already running towards them. Now she stopped frozen with legs apart. She let her nocked bow fall and then began to lift it up slowly higher and higher. They didnt hear the twang of the bowstring neither did Milva change her position or even twitch. They only saw the arrow when it dipped and hurtled downwards. The horseman lurched sideways out of the saddle the feathered shaft protruding from a shoulder. But he didnt fall. He straightened up and with a cry urged his horse into a faster gallop.
What a bow Zoltan Chivay grunted in awe. What a shot!
What a shot my arse the Witcher said wiping blood from his face. The whoresons got away and hell be back with a bunch of his mates.
She hit him! And it must have been two hundred paces!
She could have aimed at the horse.
The horse isnt guilty of anything Milva panted with anger walking over to them. She spat and watched the horseman disappear into the forest. I missed the good-for-nothing because I was a mite out of breath… Ugh you rat running away with my arrow! I hope it brings you bad luck!
The neighing of a horse could be heard from the gap in the trees and immediately afterwards the dreadful cry of a man being killed.
Ho ho! Zoltan said looking at the archer in awe. He didnt get very far! Your arrows are damned effective! Poisoned? Or enchanted perhaps? Because even if the good-for-nothing had caught the smallpox the plague wouldnt have taken its toll so quickly!
It wasnt me Milva said looking knowingly at the Witcher. Nor the smallpox. But I think I know who it was.
I think I do too the dwarf said chewing his moustache with a canny smile on his face. Ive noticed you keep looking back and I know someones secretly following us. On a chestnut colt. I dont know who he is but since it doesnt bother you… Its none of my business.
Particularly since a rearguard can have its uses Milva said looking at Geralt meaningfully. Are you certain that Cahirs your enemy?
The Witcher didnt reply. He gave Zoltan his sword back.
Thanks. It cuts nicely.
In the right hands the dwarf said grinning. Ive heard tales about witchers but to fell eight in less than two minutes…
Its nothing to brag about. They didnt know how to defend themselves.
The girl with the plaits raised herself onto her hands and knees stood up staggered and then tried ineffectually to pull down her torn shift with trembling hands. The Witcher was astonished to see that she was in no way similar to Ciri when a moment earlier he would have sworn they were twins. The girl wiped her face with an uncoordinated movement and moved unsteadily towards the cottage. Straight through the puddle of muck.
Hey wait Milva called. Hey you… Need any help? Hey!
The girl didnt even look towards her. She stumbled over the threshold almost falling then grabbed the door jamb. And slammed the door behind her.
Human gratitude knows no boundaries the dwarf commented. Milva jerked around her face hardened.
What does she have to be grateful for?
Exactly the Witcher added. What for?
For the marauders horses Zoltan said not lowering his gaze. She can slaughter them for their meat; she wont have to kill the cow. Shes clearly resistant to smallpox and now she doesnt have to fear hunger. Shell survive. And in a few days when she gathers her thoughts shell understand that thanks to you she avoided a longer frolic and these cottages being burnt to the ground. Lets get out of here before the plague blows our way… Hey Witcher where are you going? To get a token of gratitude?
To get a pair of boots Geralt said coldly stooping down over the long-haired marauder whose dead eyes stared heavenwards. These look right for me.
They ate horsemeat for several days. The boots with the shiny buckles were quite comfortable. The Nilfgaardian called Cahir was still riding in their tracks on his chestnut colt but the Witcher had stopped looking back.
He had finally fathomed the arcana of Barrel and even played a hand with the dwarves. He lost.
They didnt speak about the incident in the forest clearing. There was nothing to say.
Mandrake or Love Apple is a class of plant from the Mandragora or nightshade family a group including herbaceous stemless plants with parsnip-like roots in which a similarity to the human form may be observed; the leaves are arranged in a rosette. M. autumnalis or officinalis is cultivated on a small scale in Vicovaro Rowan and Ymlac rarely found in the wild. Its berries which are green and later turn yellow are eaten with vinegar and pepper while its leaves are consumed raw. The root of the m. which is a valued ingredient in medicine and herb lore long ago had great import in superstitions particularly among the Nordlings; human effigies (called alruniks or alraunes) were carved from it and kept in homes as revered talismans. They were believed to offer protection from illnesses to bring good fortune during trials and to ensure fertility and uncomplicated births. The effigies were clad in dresses which were changed at each new moon. M. roots were bought and sold with prices reaching as much as sixty florins. Bryony roots (q.v.) were used as substitutes. According to superstition m. was used for making spells magical philtres and poisons. This belief returned during the period of the witch hunts. The charge of the criminal use of m. was made for example during the trial of Lucretia Vigo (q.v.). The legendary Philippa Alhard (q.v.) was also said to have used m. as a poison.
Effenberg and Talbot Encyclopaedia Maxima Mundi
Volume IX
CHAPTER THREE
The Old Road had changed somewhat since the last time the Witcher had travelled along it. Once a level highway paved with slabs of basalt built by elves and dwarves centuries before it had now become a potholed ruin. In some places the holes were so deep that they resembled small quarries. The pace of the march dropped since the dwarves wagon wove between the potholes with extreme difficulty frequently becoming stuck.
Zoltan Chivay knew the reason for the roads desperate state of disrepair. Following the last war with Nilfgaard he explained the need for building materials had increased tremendously. People had recalled that the Old Road was an almost inexhaustible source of dressed stone. And since the neglected road built in the middle of nowhere and leading nowhere had long ago lost its importance for transport and served few people it was vandalised without mercy or restraint.
Your great cities the dwarf complained accompanied by the parrots screeched expletives were without exception built on dwarven and elven foundations. You built your own foundations for your smaller castles and towns but you still use our stones for the walls. And yet you never stop repeating that its thanks to you–humans–that the world progresses and develops.
Geralt did not comment.
But you dont even know how to destroy things wisely Zoltan griped ordering yet another attempt to pull a wheel out of a hole. Why cant you remove the stones gradually from the edges of the road? Youre like children! Instead of eating a doughnut systematically you gouge the jam out with a finger and then throw away the rest because its not sweet any more.
Geralt explained patiently that political geography was to blame for everything. The Old Roads western end lay in Brugge the eastern end in Temeria and the centre in Sodden so each kingdom destroyed its own section at its own discretion. In response Zoltan obscenely stated where hed happily shove all the kings and listed some imaginative indecencies he would commit regarding their politics while Field Marshal Windbag added his own contribution to the subject of the kings mothers.
The further they went the worse it became. Zoltans comparison with a jam doughnut turned out to be less than apt; the road was coming to resemble a suet pudding with all the raisins gouged out. It looked as though the inevitable moment was approaching when the wagon would shatter or become totally and irreversibly stuck. They were saved however by the same thing that had destroyed the road. They happened upon a track heading towards the south-east worn down and compacted by the heavy wagons which had been used to transport the pillaged stone. Zoltan brightened up for he recognised that the track led unerringly to one of the forts on the Ina on whose bank he was hoping to meet the Temerian Army. The dwarf solemnly believed that as during the previous war a crushing counter-attack by the northern kingdoms would be launched from Sodden on the far side of the Ina following which the survivors of Nilfgaards thoroughly decimated forces would scurry back across the Yaruga.
And indeed the change in their treks direction once again brought them closer to the war. During the night a great light suddenly flared up in front of them while during the day they saw columns of smoke marking the horizon to the south and the east. Since they were still uncertain who was attacking and burning and who was being attacked and burnt they proceeded cautiously sending Percival Schuttenbach far ahead to reconnoitre.
They were astonished one morning to be overtaken by a riderless horse the chestnut colt. The green saddlecloth embroidered with Nilfgaardian symbols was stained with dark streaks of blood. There was no way of knowing if it was the blood of the horseman who had been killed near the hawkers wagon or if it had been spilt later when the horse had acquired a new owner.
Well that takes care of the problem Milva said glancing at Geralt. If it ever really was a problem.
The biggest problem is we dont know who knocked the rider from the saddle Zoltan muttered. And whether that someone is following our trail and the trail of our erstwhile unusual rearguard.
He was a Nilfgaardian Geralt said between clenched teeth. He spoke almost without an accent but runaway peasants could have recognised it…
Milva turned to face him.
You ought to have finished him off Witcher she said softly. He would have had a kinder death.
He got out of that coffin Dandelion said nodding looking meaningfully at Geralt just to rot in some ditch.
And that was the epitaph for Cahir son of Ceallach the Nilfgaardian who insisted he wasnt a Nilfgaardian. He was not talked about any longer. Since Geralt–in spite of repeated threats–seemed to be in no hurry to part with the skittish Roach Zoltan Chivay mounted the chestnut. The dwarfs feet didnt reach the stirrups but the colt was mild-mannered and let himself be ridden.
During the night the horizon was bright with the glow of fires and during the day ribbons of smoke rose into the sky soiling the blue. They soon came upon some burnt-out buildings with flames still creeping over the charred beams and ridges. Alongside the smouldering timbers sat eight ragged figures and five dogs all busily gnawing the remains of the flesh from a bloated partly charred horse carcass. At the sight of the dwarves the feasters fled in a panic. Only one man and one dog remained who no threats were capable of tearing away from the carrion on the arched spine and ribs. Zoltan and Percival tried to question the man but learned nothing. He only whimpered trembled tucked his head into his shoulders and choked on the scraps torn from the bones. The dog snarled and bared its teeth up to its gums. The horses carcass stank repulsively.
They took a risk and didnt leave the road and soon reached the next smouldering remains. A sizeable village had been burnt down and a skirmish must have taken place nearby because they saw a fresh burial mound directly behind the smoking ruins. And at a certain distance beyond the mound a huge oak tree stood by the crossroads. The tree was hung with acorns.
And human corpses.
We ought to take a look Zoltan Chivay decided putting an end to the discussion about the risks and the danger. Lets go closer.
Why the bloody hell Dandelion asked losing his temper do you want to look at those corpses Zoltan? To despoil them? I can see from here they dont even have boots.
Fool. Its not their boots Im interested in but the military situation. I want to know of the developments in the theatre of war. Whats so funny? Youre just a poet and you dont know what strategy is.
Youre in for a surprise. I do.
Nonsense. You wouldnt know strategy from your own arse even if your life depended on it.
Indeed I wouldnt. Ill leave half-arsed strategies to dwarves. The same applies to strategies dangling from oak trees.
Zoltan dismissed him with a wave and tramped over to the tree. Dandelion who had never been able to rein in his curiosity urged Pegasus on and trotted after him. A moment later Geralt decided to follow them. And then noticed that Milva was riding behind him.
The crows feeding on the carcasses took flight cawing and flapping their wings noisily. Some of them flew off towards the forest while others merely alighted on the mighty trees higher branches intently observing Field Marshal Windbag who was coarsely defaming their mothers from the dwarfs shoulder.
The first of the seven hanged humans had a sign on his chest reading: Traitor. The second was described as a Collaborator the third as an Elven Nark and the fourth as a Deserter. The fifth was a woman in a torn and bloodied shift described as a Nilfgaardian Whore. Two of the corpses werent bearing signs which suggested at least some of the victims had been hanged by chance.
Look Zoltan Chivay said cheerfully pointing at the signs. Our army passed by this way. Our brave boys have taken the initiative and repulsed the enemy. And they had time as we can see for relaxation and wartime entertainment.
And what does that mean for us?
That the front has moved and the Temerian Army are between us and the Nilfgaardians. Were safe.
And the smoke ahead of us?
Thats our boys the dwarf declared confidently. Theyre burning down villages where Squirrels were given rest or vittles. Were behind the front line now Im telling you. The southern way heads from the crossroads to Armeria a fortress lying in a fork of the Chotla and the Ina. The road looks decent we can take it. We neednt be afraid of Nilfgaardians now.
Where theres smoke theres fire Milva said. And where theres fire you can get your fingers burnt. I reckon its stupid to head towards the flames. Its also stupid to travel along a road when the cavalry could be on us in an instant. Lets disappear into the trees.
The Temerians or an army from Sodden passed through here the dwarf insisted. Were behind the front line. We can march along the highway without fear; if we come across an army itll be ours.
Risky said the archer shaking her head. If youre such an old hand Zoltan you must know that Nilfgaard usually sends advance parties a long way ahead. Perhaps the Temerians were here. But we have no idea whats in front of us. The skys black from smoke to the south. That fortress of yours in Armeria is probably burning right now. Which means we arent behind the front line but right on it. We may run into the army marauders leaderless bands of rogues or Squirrels. Lets head for the Chotla but along forest tracks.
Shes right Dandelion concurred. I dont like the look of that smoke either. And even if Temeria is on the offensive there may still be advance Nilfgaardian squadrons in front of us. The Nilfgaardians are fond of long-distance raids. They attack the rear lines link up with the Scoiatael wreak havoc and ride back. I remember what happened in Upper Sodden during the last war. Im also in favour of travelling through the forest. We have nothing to fear there.
I wouldnt be so sure Geralt said pointing to the last corpse who although he was dangling high up had bloody stumps instead of feet. They looked like they had been raked by talons until all that was left was protruding bones. Look. Thats the work of ghouls.
Ghouls? Zoltan Chivay said retreating and spitting on the ground. Flesh-eaters?
Naturally. We have to beware in the forest at night.
Fuuuckiiin ell! Field Marshal Windbag screeched.
You took the words right out of my mouth birdie Zoltan Chivay said frowning. Well were in a pretty pickle. Whats it to be then? Into the forest where theres ghouls or along the road where theres armies and marauders?
Into the forest Milva said with conviction. The denser the better. I prefer ghouls to humans.
They marched through the forest at first cautious on edge reacting with alarm to every rustle in the undergrowth. Soon however they regained their poise their good humour and their previous speed. They didnt see any ghouls or the slightest trace of their presence. Zoltan joked that spectres and any other demons must have heard about the approaching armies and if the fiends had happened to see the marauders and Verdenian volunteers in action then–seized with terror–they would have hidden in their most remote and inaccessible lairs where they were now cowering and trembling fangs chattering.
And theyre guarding the she-ghouls their wives and their daughters Milva snapped. The monsters know that a soldier on the march wont even pass up a sheep. And if you hung a womans shift on a willow tree a knothole would be enough for those heroes. She looked pointedly at the women and children from Kernow who were still with the group.
Dandelion who had been full of vigour and good humour for quite some time tuned his lute and began to compose a fitting couplet about willows knotholes and lascivious warriors and the dwarves and the parrot outdid each other in supplying ideas for rhymes.
O Zoltan stated.
What? Where? Dandelion asked standing up in his stirrups and looking down into the ravine in the direction the dwarf was pointing. I cant see anything!
O.
Dont drivel like your parrot! What do you mean oh?
Its a stream Zoltan calmly explained. A right-bank tributary of the Chotla. Its called the O.
Ey…
Not a bit of it! Percival Schuttenbach laughed. The A joins the Chotla upstream some way from here. Thats the O not the A.
The ravine along the bottom of which flowed the stream with the uncomplicated name was overgrown with nettles taller than the marching dwarves smelled intensively of mint and rotten wood and resounded with the unremitting croaking of frogs. It also had steep sides which turned out to be fatal. Vera Loewenhaupts wagon which from the beginning of the journey had valiantly born the adversities of fate and overcome every obstacle lost out in its clash with the stream by the name of O. It slipped from the hands of the dwarves leading it downwards bounced on down to the very bottom of the ravine and was smashed to matchwood.
Kin… ell! Field Marshal Windbag squawked a counterpoint to the massed cry of Zoltan and his company.
To tell the truth Dandelion concluded scrutinising the remains of the vehicle and the scattered possessions perhaps its for the best. That bloody wagon of yours only slowed down the march. There were constant problems with it. Look at it realistically Zoltan. We were just lucky that no one was following us. If wed had to suddenly run for it wed have had to abandon the wagon along with all of your belongings which we can now at least salvage.
The dwarf seethed and grunted angrily into his beard but Percival Schuttenbach unexpectedly backed up the troubadour. The support as the Witcher observed was accompanied by several conspiratorial winks. The winks were meant to be surreptitious but the lively expression of the gnomes little face revealed everything.
The poets right Percival repeated contorting his face and winking. Were a muddy stones throw from the Chotla and the Ina. Fen Carns in front of us; not a road to be seen. It would have been arduous with a wagon. And should we meet the Temerian Army by the Ina with our load… we might be in trouble.
Zoltan pondered this sniffing.
Very well he said finally looking at the remains of the wagon being washed by the Os lazy current. Well split up. Munro Figgis Yazon and Caleb will stay here. The rest of us will continue on our way. Well have to saddle the horses with our sacks of vittles and small tackle. Munro do you know what to do? Got spades?
Yes.
Just dont leave the merest trace! And mark the spot well and remember it!
Rest assured.
Youll catch up with us easily Zoltan said throwing his rucksack and sihil over his shoulder and adjusting the battle-axe in his belt. Well be heading down the O and then along the Chotla to the Ina. Farewell.
I wonder Milva mumbled to Geralt when the depleted unit had set off sent on its way by the waving of the four dwarves who were remaining behind I wonder what they have in those chests that needs burying in secret.
Its not our business.
I cant imagine Dandelion said sotto voce cautiously steering Pegasus between the fallen trees that there were spare trousers in those chests. Theyre pinning their hopes on that load. I talked with them enough to work out how the land lies and what might be concealed in those coffers.
And what might be concealed in them in your opinion?
Their future the poet said looking around to check no one could hear. Percivals a stone polisher and cutter by trade and wants to open his own workshop. Figgis and Yazon are smiths theyve been talking about a forge. Caleb Stratton plans to marry but his fiancées parents have already driven him away once as a penniless bum. And Zoltan…
Thats enough Dandelion. Youre gossiping like an old woman. No offence Milva.
None taken.
The trees thinned out beyond the stream and the dark boggy strip of ancient woodland. They rode into a clearing with low birch woods and dry meadows. In spite of that they made slow progress. Following the example of Milva who right away had lifted the freckled girl with the plaits onto her saddle Dandelion also put a child on Pegasus while Zoltan put a couple on his chestnut colt and walked alongside holding the reins. But the pace didnt increase since the women from Kernow were unable to keep up.
It was almost evening when after nearly an hour of roaming through ravines and gorges Zoltan Chivay stopped exchanged a few words with Percival Schuttenbach and then turned to the rest of the company.
Dont yell and dont laugh at me he said but I reckon were lost. I dont bloody know where we are or which way to go.
Dont talk drivel Dandelion said irritated. What do you mean you dont know? After all were following the course of the river. And down there in the ravine is your O. Right?
Right. But look which way its flowing.
Oh bugger. Thats impossible!
No its not Milva said gloomily patiently pulling dry leaves and pine needles from the hair of the freckled girl who was riding in front of her. Were lost among the ravines. The stream twists and turns. Were on a meander.
But its still the O Dandelion insisted. If we follow the river we cant get lost. Little rivers are known to meander I admit but ultimately they all invariably flow into something bigger. That is the way of the world.
Dont play the smart-arse singer Zoltan said wrinkling his nose. And shut your trap. Cant you see Im thinking?
No. Theres nothing to suggest it. I repeat lets keep to the course of the stream and then…
Thatll do Milva snapped. Youre a townie. Your world is bounded by walls. Perhaps your worldly wisdom is of some use there. Take a look around! The valleys furrowed by ravines with steep overgrown banks. How do you think well follow the course of the stream? Down the side of a gorge into thickets and bogs up the other side and down again and up again pulling our horses by the reins? After two ravines youll be so short of breath youll be flat on your back halfway up a slope. Were leading women and children Dandelion. And the sunll be setting directly.
I noticed. Very well Ill keep quiet. And listen to what the experienced forest trackers come up with.
Zoltan Chivay cuffed the cursing parrot around the head twisted a tuft of his beard around a finger and tugged it in anger.
Percival?
We know the rough direction the gnome said squinting up at the sun which was suspended just above the treetops. So the first conception is this: blow the stream turn back leave these ravines for dry land and go through Fen Carn between the rivers all the way to the Chotla.
And the second conception?
The Os shallow. Even though its carrying more water than usual after the recent rains it can be forded. Well cut off the meanders by wading through the stream each time it blocks our way. By holding a course according to the sun well come right out at the fork of the Chotla and the Ina.
No the Witcher suddenly broke in. I suggest we drop the second idea right away. Lets not even think about it. On the far bank well end up in one of the Mealybug Moors sooner or later. Its a vile place and I strongly advise we keep well away from it.
Do you know these parts then? Ever been there before? Do you know how we can get out of here?
The Witcher remained silent for a while.
Ive only been there once he said wiping his forehead. Three years ago. But I entered from the other side. I was heading for Brugge and wanted to take a short cut. How I got out I dont remember. I was carried out on a wagon half-dead.
The dwarf looked at him for a while but asked no more questions.
They returned in silence. The women from Kernow had difficulty walking. They were stumbling and using sticks for support but none of them uttered a word of complaint. Milva rode alongside the Witcher holding up the girl with the plaits who was asleep on the saddle in front of her.
I think she suddenly began that you got carved up in that wilderness three years ago. By some monster I understand. You have a dangerous job Geralt.
I dont deny it.
I remember what happened then Dandelion boasted from behind. You were wounded some merchant got you out and then you found Ciri in Riverdell. Yennefer told me about it.
At the sound of that name Milva smiled faintly. It did not escape Geralts notice. He decided to give Dandelion a good dressing down at the next camp for his untrammelled chatter. Knowing the poet he couldnt count on any results particularly since Dandelion had probably already blabbed everything he knew.
Perhaps it wasnt such a good idea said the archer after a while that we didnt cross to the far bank towards the wilderness. If you found the girl then… The elves say that sometimes lightning can strike twice. They call it… Bugger Ive forgotten. The noose of fate?
The loop he corrected her. The loop of fate.
Uurgh! Dandelion said grimacing. Cant you stop talking about nooses and loops? A she-elf once divined that I would say farewell to this vale of tears on the scaffold with the help of the deathsman. Admittedly I dont believe in that type of tawdry fortune-telling but a few days ago I dreamed I was being hanged. I awoke in a muck sweat unable to swallow or catch my breath. So I listen with reluctance to discussions about gibbets.
Im not talking to you Im talking to the Witcher Milva riposted. So dont flap your ears and nothing horrible will fall into them. Well then Geralt? What have you got to say about that loop of fate? If we go to the wilderness perhaps time will repeat itself.
Thats why its good weve turned back he replied brusquely. I dont have the slightest desire to repeat that nightmare.
Theres no two ways about it. Zoltan nodded looking around. Youve led us to a pretty charming place Percival.
Fen Carn the gnome muttered scratching the tip of his long nose. Meadow of the Barrows… Ive always wondered how it got its name…
Now you know.
The broad valley in front of them was already shrouded in evening mist from which as far as the eye could see protruded thousands of burial mounds and moss-covered monoliths. Some of the boulders were ordinary shapeless lumps of stone. Others smoothly hewn had been sculpted into obelisks and menhirs. Still others standing closer to the centre of this stone forest were formed into dolmens cairns and cromlechs in a way that ruled out any natural processes.
Indeed the dwarf repeated a charming place to spend the night. An elven cemetery. If my memory doesnt fail me Witcher some time ago you mentioned ghouls. Well you ought to know I can sense them among these kurgans. I bet theres everything here. Ghouls graveirs spectres wights elven spirits wraiths apparitions; the works. Theyre hunkered down there and do you know what theyre whispering? We wont have to go looking for supper because its come right to us. 
Perhaps we ought to go back Dandelion suggested in a whisper. Perhaps we should get out of here while theres still some light.
Thats what I think too.
The womenfolk cant go any further Milva said angrily. The kids are ready to drop. The horses have stopped. You were the one driving us on Zoltan. Lets keep going just another half a mile you kept repeating. Just another furlong you said. And now what? Two more furlongs back the way we came? Crap. Cemetery or no cemetery were stopping for the night the first place we find.
Thats right the Witcher said in support dismounting. Dont panic. Not every necropolis is crawling with monsters and apparitions. Ive never been to Fen Carn before but if it were really dangerous Id have heard about it.
No one not even Field Marshal Windbag commented. The women from Kernow retrieved their children and sat down in a tight group silent and visibly frightened. Percival and Dandelion tethered the horses and let them graze on the lush grass. Geralt Zoltan and Milva approached the edge of the meadow to look at the burial ground drowning in the fog and the gathering gloom.
To cap it all the moons completely full the dwarf muttered. Oh dear therell be a ghastly feast tonight I can feel it oh the demons will make our lives miserable… But whats that glow to the south? A fire?
What else? Of course it is the Witcher confirmed. Someones torched someone elses roof over their head again. Know what Zoltan? I think I feel safer here in Fen Carn.
Ill feel like that too but only when the sun comes up. As long as the ghouls let us see out the night.
Milva rummaged in her saddlebag and took out something shiny.
A silver arrowhead she said. Kept for just such an occasion. It cost me five crowns at the market. That ought to kill a ghoul right Witcher?
I dont think there are any ghouls here.
You said yourself Zoltan snapped that ghouls had been chewing that corpse on the oak tree. And where theres a cemetery there are ghouls.
Not always.
Ill take your word for it. Youre a witcher a specialist; so youll defend us I hope. You chopped up those marauders pretty smartly… Is it harder fighting ghouls than marauders?
Incomparably. I said stop panicking.
And will it be any good for a vampire? Milva asked screwing the silver arrowhead onto a shaft and checking it for sharpness with her thumb. Or a spectre?
It may be.
An ancient dwarven incantation in ancient dwarven runes is engraved on my sihil Zoltan growled drawing his sword If just one ghoul approaches at a blades length it wont forget me. Right here look.
Ah Dandelion who had just joined them said with interest. So those are some of the famous secret runes of the dwarves. What does the engraving say?
 Confusion to the whores sons! 
Something moved among the stones Percival Schuttenbach suddenly yelled. Its a ghoul its a ghoul!
Where?
Over there! Its hid itself among the boulders!
One?
I saw one!
He must be seriously hungry since hes trying to get his teeth into us before nightfall the dwarf said spitting on his hands and gripping the hilt of his sihil tightly. Ha! Hell soon find out gluttony will be his ruin! Milva you stick an arrow in his arse and Ill cut his gizzard open!
I cant see anything there Milva hissed with the fletchings already touching her chin. Not a single weed between the stones is trembling. Sure you werent seeing things gnome?
Not a chance Percival protested. Do you see that boulder that looks like a broken table? The ghoul hid behind it.
You lot stay here Geralt said quickly drawing his sword from the scabbard on his back. Guard the womenfolk and keep an eye on the horses. If the ghouls attack the animals will panic. Ill go and find out what it was.
You arent going by yourself Zoltan firmly stated. Back there in the clearing I let you go alone. I chickened out because of the smallpox. And two nights running I havent slept for shame. Never again! Percival where are you off to? To the rear? You claim to have seen the phantom so now youre going in the vanguard. Dont be afeared Im coming with you.
They headed off cautiously between the barrows trying not to disturb the weeds–which were knee-high to Geralt and waist-high to the dwarf and the gnome. As they approached the dolmen that Percival had pointed out they artfully split up cutting off the ghouls potential escape route. But the strategy turned out to be unnecessary. As Geralt had expected his witcher medallion didnt even quiver; betrayed no sign of anything monstrous nearby.
Theres no one here Zoltan confirmed looking around. Not a soul. You must have imagined it Percival. Its a false alarm. You put the wind up us for no reason. You truly deserve my boot up your arse for that.
I saw it! the gnome said indignantly. I saw it hopping about among the stones! It was skinny and dressed all in black like a tax collector…
Be quiet you foolish gnome or Ill…
Whats that strange odour? Geralt suddenly asked. Can you smell it?
Indeed the dwarf said nose extended like a pointer. What a pong.
Herbs Percival said sniffling with his sensitive two-inch-long nose. Wormwood basil sage aniseed… Cinnamon? What the blazes?
What do ghouls smell of Geralt?
Rotting corpses the Witcher said taking a quick look around and searching for footprints in the grass. Then with a few swift steps he returned to the sunken dolmen and tapped gently against the stone with the flat of his sword.
Get out he said through clenched teeth. I know youre in there. Be quick or Ill poke a hole in you.
A soft scraping could be heard from a cleverly concealed cavity beneath the stones.
Get out Geralt repeated. Youre perfectly safe.
We wont touch a hair on your head Zoltan added sweetly raising his sihil above the hollow and rolling his eyes menacingly. Out with you!
Geralt shook his head and made a clear sign for the dwarf to withdraw. Once again there was a scratching from the cavity under the dolmen and once again they were aware of the intense aroma of herbs and spices. A moment later they saw a grizzled head and then a face embellished with a nobly aquiline nose belonging by no means to a ghoul but to a slim middle-aged man. Percival hadnt been wrong. The man did indeed somewhat resemble a tax collector.
Is it safe to come out? he asked raising black eyes beneath slightly greying eyebrows towards Geralt.
Yes it is.
The man scrambled out of the hole brushed down his black robes–which were tied around the waist with some kind of apron–and straightened a linen bag causing another wave of the herbal aroma.
I suggest you put away your weapons gentlemen he declared in a measured voice running his eyes over the group of wanderers surrounding him. They wont be necessary. I as you can see bear no blade. I never do. Neither do I have anything on me that might be termed attractive booty. My name is Emiel Regis. I come from Dillingen. Im a barber-surgeon.
Indeed Zoltan Chivay grimaced a little. A barber-surgeon alchemist or herbalist. No offence my dear sir but you smell seriously like an apothecarys shop.
Emiel Regis smiled strangely with pursed lips and spread his arms apologetically.
The scent betrayed you master barber-surgeon Geralt said replacing his sword in its sheath. Did you have any particular reason to hide from us?
Any particular reason? the man asked turning his black eyes towards him. No. I was just taking general precautions. I was simply afraid of you. These are difficult times.
True. The dwarf nodded and pointed towards the glow of fire lighting up the sky. Difficult times. I surmise that you are a fugitive as we are. It intrigues me however that although youve fled far from your native Dillingen youre hiding all alone among these kurgans. Well peoples fates are various particularly during difficult times. We were afraid of you and you of us. Fear makes one imagine things.
You have nothing to fear from me the man who was claiming to be Emiel Regis said without taking his eyes off them I hope I can count on reciprocity.
My my Zoltan said grinning broadly. You dont take us for robbers do you? We master barber-surgeon are fugitives. We are travelling to the Temerian border. You may join us if you wish. The more the merrier… and safer and a physician may come in handy. We have women and children in the party. Among the stinking medicaments I can smell about you would you have a remedy for blisters?
I ought to have something the barber-surgeon said softly. Glad to be of assistance. But as far as travelling together is concerned… Thank you for the offer but Im not running away gentlemen. I wasnt fleeing from Dillingen to escape the war. I live here.
Come again? the dwarf said frowning and taking a step back. You live here? Here in this burial ground?
In the burial ground? No. I have a cottage not far from here. Apart from my house and shop in Dillingen you understand. But I spend my summers here every year from June to September from Midsummer to the Equinox. I gather healing herbs and roots from which I distil medicines and elixirs in my cottage…
But you know about the war in spite of your reclusive solitude far from the world and people. Geralt pointed out. Who do you get your news from?
From the refugees who pass this way. Theres a large camp less than two miles from here by the River Chotla. A good few hundred fugitives–peasants from Brugge and Sodden–are gathered there.
And what about the Temerian Army? Zoltan asked with interest. Are they on the move?
I know nothing about that.
The dwarf swore and then glowered at the barber-surgeon.
So you simply live here Master Regis he drawled and stroll among the graves of an evening. Arent you afraid?
What ought I to be afraid of?
This here gentleman Zoltan pointed at Geralt is a witcher. He saw evidence of ghouls not long ago. Corpse eaters get it? And you dont have to be a witcher to know that ghouls hang around in cemeteries.
A witcher the barber-surgeon said and looked at Geralt with obvious interest. A monster killer. Well well. Fascinating. Didnt you explain to your comrades Master Witcher that this necropolis is over five hundred years old? Ghouls arent fussy about what they eat but they dont chew five-hundred-year-old bones. There arent any ghouls here.
I feel a lot better knowing that Zoltan Chivay said looking around. Well master physician come over to our camp. We have some cold horsemeat. You wont refuse it will you?
Regis looked at him long and hard.
My thanks he said finally. But I have a better idea. Come to my place. My summer abode is more of a shack than a cottage and a small one at that. Youll have no choice but to sleep under the stars. But theres a spring nearby and a hearth where you can warm up your horsemeat.
Well gladly take you up on your invitation the dwarf said bowing. Perhaps there really arent any ghouls here but the thought of spending a night in the burial ground doesnt do much for me. Lets go Ill introduce you to the rest of our company.
When they reached the camp the horses snorted and stamped their hooves on the ground.
Stand a little downwind Master Regis Zoltan Chivay said casting the physician a telling glance. The smell of sage frightens our horses and in my case Im ashamed to admit reminds me unpleasantly of teeth being pulled.
Geralt Zoltan muttered as soon as Emiel Regis had disappeared behind the flap covering the entrance to the cottage. Lets keep our eyes open. Theres something fishy about that stinking herbalist.
Anything specific?
I dont like it when people spend their summers near cemeteries never mind cemeteries a long way from human dwellings. Do herbs really not grow in more pleasant surroundings? That Regis looks like a grave robber to me. Barber-surgeons alchemists and the like exhume corpses from boneyards in order to perform various excrements on them.
Experiments. But fresh corpses are needed for practices of that kind. This cemetery is very old.
True the dwarf said scratching his chin and watching the women from Kernow making their beds under some hagberry shrubs growing by the barber-surgeons shack. So perhaps he steals buried treasure from these barrows?
Ask him Geralt said shrugging. You accepted the invitation to stay at his homestead at once without hesitation and now youve suddenly become as suspicious as an old maid being paid a compliment.
Er… Zoltan mumbled somewhat tongue-tied. Theres something in that. But Id like to have a gander at what he keeps in that hovel of his. You know just to be on the safe side…
So follow him in and pretend you want to borrow a fork.
Why a fork?
Why not?
The dwarf gave Geralt an old-fashioned look and finally made up his mind. He hurried over to the cottage knocked politely on the door jamb and entered. He remained inside for some little time and then suddenly appeared in the doorway.
Geralt Percival Dandelion step this way. Come and see something interesting. Come on without further ado Master Regis has invited us in.
The interior of the cottage was dark and dominated by a warm intoxicating aroma that made the nose tickle mainly coming from the bunches of herbs and roots hanging from all the walls. The only items of furniture were a simple cot–also strewn with herbs–and a rickety table cluttered with innumerable glass pottery and ceramic vials. The room was illuminated by the dim glow of burning coals in a curious pot-bellied stove resembling a bulging hourglass. The stove was surrounded by a spidery lattice of shining pipes of various diameters bent into curves and spirals. Beneath one of the pipes stood a wooden pail into which a liquid was dripping.
At the sight of the stove Percival Schuttenbach first stared goggle-eyed then gaped and finally sighed and leapt up in the air.
Ho ho ho! he called unable to conceal his delight. What do I see? Thats an absolutely authentic athanor coupled to an alembic! Equipped with a rectifying column and a copper condenser! A beautiful apparatus! Did you build it yourself master barber-surgeon?
Indeed Emiel Regis admitted modestly. My work involves producing elixirs so I have to distil extract the fifth essence and also…
He broke off seeing Zoltan Chivay catching a drop falling from the end of the pipe and licking his finger. The dwarf sighed and a look of indescribable bliss appeared on his ruddy face.
Dandelion couldnt resist and also had a go tasting and moaning softly.
The fifth essence he confirmed smacking his lips. And I suspect the sixth and even the seventh.
Well… The barber-surgeon smiled faintly. As I said: a distillate.
Moonshine Zoltan corrected him gently. And what moonshine! Try some Percival.
But Im not an expert in organic chemistry the gnome answered absentmindedly examining the details of the alchemical furnaces construction. Its doubtful I would be familiar with the ingredients…
It is a distillate of mandrake Regis said dispelling any doubt. Enriched with belladonna. And fermented starch mass.
You mean mash?
One could also call it that.
May I request a cup of some kind?
Zoltan Dandelion the Witcher said folding his arms on his chest. Are you deaf? Its mandrake. The moonshine is made of mandrake. Leave that copper alone.
But dear Master Geralt the alchemist said digging a small graduated flask out from between some dust-covered retorts and demijohns and meticulously polishing it with a rag. Theres nothing to be afraid of. The mandrake is appropriately seasoned and the proportions carefully selected and precisely weighed out. I only add five ounces of mandrake to a pound of mash and only half a dram of belladonna…
Thats not the point the Witcher said looking at Zoltan. The dwarf understood at once grew serious and cautiously withdrew from the still. The point is not how many drams you add Master Regis but how much a dram of mandrake costs. Its too dear a tipple for us.
Mandrake Dandelion whispered in awe pointing at the small heap of sugar beet-like roots piled up in the corner of the shack. Thats mandrake? Real mandrake?
The female form–the alchemist nodded–grows in large clumps in the very cemetery where we chanced to meet. Which is also why I spend my summers here.
The Witcher looked knowingly at Zoltan. The dwarf winked. Regis gave a half-suppressed smile.
Gentlemen please I warmly invite you to sample it if you wish. I appreciate your moderation but in the current situation theres little chance of me taking the elixirs to war-torn Dillingen. It all would have gone to waste anyway so lets not talk about the price. My apologies but I only have one drinking vessel.
That should do Zoltan said picking up the flask and carefully scooping up moonshine from the pail. Your good health Master Regis. Ooooh…
Please forgive me the barber-surgeon said smiling again. The quality of the distillate probably leaves a lot to be desired… Its actually unfinished.
Its the best unfinished product Ive ever tasted Zoltan said gasping. Your turn poet.
Aaaah… Oh mother of mine! Excellent! Have a sip Geralt.
Give it to our host the Witcher said bowing slightly towards Emiel Regis. Where are your manners Dandelion?
Please forgive me gentlemen the alchemist said acknowledging the gesture but I never permit myself any stimulants. My health isnt what it was. Ive been forced to give up many… pleasures.
Not even a sip?
Its a principle Regis explained calmly. I never break any principles once Ive adopted them.
I admire and envy you your resoluteness Geralt said sipping a little from the flask and then after a moments hesitation draining it in one. The tears trickling from his eyes interfered a little with the taste of the moonshine. An invigorating warmth spread through his stomach.
Ill go and get Milva he offered handing the flask to the dwarf. Dont polish it all off before we get back.
Milva was sitting near the horses bantering with the freckled girl she had been carrying on her saddle all day. When she heard about Regiss hospitality she initially shrugged but in the end didnt need much persuading.
When they entered the shack they found the company carrying out an inspection of the stored mandrake roots.
Ive never seen it before Dandelion confessed turning a bulbous root around in his fingers. Indeed it does somewhat resemble a man.
A man twisted by lumbago perhaps Zoltan added. And that ones the spitting image of a pregnant woman. And that one if youll excuse me looks just like a couple busy bonking.
You lot only think of one thing Milva sneered boldly drinking from the full flask and then coughing loudly into a fist. Bloody hell… Powerful stuff that hooch! Is it really made from love apples? Ha so were drinking a magic potion! That doesnt happen every day. Thank you master barber-surgeon.
The pleasure is all mine.
The flask kept topped up circulated around the company prompting good humour verve and garrulousness.
The mandrake I hear is a vegetable with great magical powers Percival Schuttenbach said with conviction.
Yes indeed Dandelion confirmed. He then emptied the flask shuddered and resumed talking. Theres no shortage of ballads written on the subject. Its well known that sorcerers use mandrake in elixirs which help them preserve their eternal youth and sorceresses make an ointment which they call glamarye. If an enchantress applies such ointment she becomes so beautiful and enchanting it makes your eyes pop out of your head. You also ought to know that mandrake is a powerful aphrodisiac and is used in love magic particularly to break down female resistance. Thats the explanation of mandrakes folk name: love apple. Its a herb used to pander lovers.
Blockhead Milva commented.
And I heard the gnome said downing the contents of the flask that when mandrake root is pulled from the ground the plant cries and wails as though it were alive.
Why Zoltan said filling the flask from the pail if it only wailed! Mandrake they say screams so horribly it can send you up the wall and moreover it screams out evil spells and showers curses on whoever uproots it. You can pay with your life taking a risk like that.
That sounds like a cloth-headed fairy-tale Milva said taking the flask from him and drinking deeply. She shuddered and added: Its impossible for a plant to have such powers.
Its an infallible truth! the dwarf called heatedly. But sagacious herbalists have found a way of protecting themselves. Having found a mandrake you must tie one end of a rope to the root and the other end to a dog…
Or a pig the gnome broke in.
Or a wild boar Dandelion added gravely.
Youre a fool poet. The whole point is for the mutt or swine to pull the mandrake out of the ground for then the vegetables curses and spells fall on the said creature while the herbalist–hiding safely far away in the bushes–gets out in one piece. Well Master Regis? Am I talking sense?
An interesting method the alchemist admitted smiling mysteriously. Interesting mainly for its ingenuity. The disadvantage however is its extreme complexity. For in theory the rope ought to be enough without the draught animal. I wouldnt suspect mandrake of having the ability of knowing who or whats pulling the rope. The spells and curses should always fall on the rope which after all is cheaper and less problematic to use than a dog not to mention a pig.
Are you jesting?
Wouldnt dream of it. I said I admire the ingenuity. Because although the mandrake contrary to popular opinion is incapable of casting spells or curses it is–in its raw state–an extremely toxic plant to the extent that even the earth around the root is poisonous. Sprinkling the fresh juice onto the face or on a cut hand why even breathing in its fumes may all have fatal consequences. I wear a mask and gloves which doesnt mean I have anything against the rope method.
Mmmm… the dwarf pondered. But what about that horrifying scream the plucked mandrake makes? Is that true?
The mandrake doesnt have vocal chords the alchemist explained calmly which is fairly typical for plants is it not? However the toxin secreted by the root has a powerful hallucinogenic effect. The voices screams whispers and other sounds are nothing more than hallucinations produced by the poisoned central nervous system.
Ha I clean forgot Dandelion said having just drained the flask and letting out a suppressed burp that mandrake is extremely poisonous! And I was holding it! And now were guzzling this tincture with abandon…
Only the fresh mandrake root is toxic Regis said calming him down. Mine is seasoned and suitably prepared and the distillate has been filtered. There is no need for alarm.
Of course there isnt Zoltan agreed. Moonshine will always be moonshine you can even distil it from hemlock nettles fish scales and old bootlaces. Give us the glass Dandelion theres a queue forming here.
The flask kept topped up circulated around the company. Everybody was sitting comfortably on the dirt floor. The Witcher hissed and swore and shifted his position because the pain shot through his knee again as he sat. He caught sight of Regis looking at him intently. Is that a fresh injury?
Not really. But its tormenting me. Do you have any herbs capable of soothing the pain?
That all depends on the class of pain the barber-surgeon said smiling slightly. And on its causes. I can detect a strange odour in your sweat Witcher. Were you treated with magic? Were you given magic enzymes and hormones?
They gave me various medicaments. I had no idea they could still be smelled in my sweat. Youve got a bloody sensitive nose Regis.
Everybody has their good points. To even out the vices. What ailment did they use magic to treat you with?
I broke my arm and the shaft of my thighbone.
How long ago?
A little over a month.
And youre already walking? Remarkable. The dryads of Brokilon I presume?
How can you tell?
Only the dryads have medicaments capable of rebuilding bone tissue so quickly. I can see dark marks on the backs of your hands. Theyre the places where the tendrils of the conynhaela and the symbiotic shoots of knitbone entered. Only dryads know how to use conynhaela and knitbone doesnt grow outside Brokilon.
Well done. Admirable deduction skills. Though something else interests me. My thighbone and forearm were broken but the strong pain is in the knee and elbow.
Thats typical the barber-surgeon nodded. The dryads magic reconstructed your damaged bone but simultaneously caused a minor upheaval in your nerve trunks. Its a side effect felt most intensely in the joints.
What do you advise?
Unfortunately nothing. Youll continue to predict rainy weather unerringly for a long time to come. The pains will grow stronger in the winter. However I wouldnt recommend that you take powerful painkilling drugs. Particularly steer clear of narcotics. Youre a witcher and in your case its absolutely to be avoided.
Ill treat myself with your mandrake then the Witcher said raising the full flask which Milva had just handed him. He took a deep swallow and hacked until tears filled his eyes. Bloody hell! Im feeling better already.
Im not certain Regis said smiling through pursed lips that youre treating the right illness. Id also like to remind you that one should treat causes not symptoms.
Not in the case of this witcher Dandelion snorted now a little flushed and eavesdropping on their conversation. Booze is just right for him and his worries.
It ought to do you good too Geralt said giving the poet a chilling stare. Particularly if it paralyses your tongue.
I wouldnt especially count on that. The barber-surgeon smiled again. Belladonna is one of the preparations ingredients which means a large number of alkaloids including scopolamine. Before the mandrake puts you to sleep youre all sure to give me a display of eloquence.
A display of what? Percival asked.
Talkativeness. My apologies. Lets use simpler words.
Geralt mouth twisted into a fake smile.
Thats right he said. Its easy to adopt an affected style and start using words like that every day. Then people take the speaker for an arrogant buffoon.
Or an alchemist Zoltan Chivay said filling the flask from the pail once more.
Or a witcher Dandelion snorted whos read a lot to impress a certain enchantress. Nothing attracts enchantresses like an elaborate tale gentlemen. Am I right Geralt? Go on spin us a yarn…
Sit out your turn Dandelion the Witcher cut in coldly. The alkaloids in this hooch are acting on you too quickly. Theyve loosened your tongue.
Its time you gave up your secrets Geralt Zoltan grimaced. Dandelion hasnt told us much we didnt know. You cant help it if youre a walking legend. They re-enact stories of your adventures in puppet theatres. Like the story about you and an enchantress by the name of Guinevere.
Yennefer Regis corrected in hushed tones. I saw that one. It was the story of a hunt for a genie if my memory serves me correctly.
I was present during that hunt Dandelion boasted. We had some laughs I can tell you…
Tell them all Geralt said getting up. Tell them while youre sipping the moonshine and embellishing the story suitably. Im taking a walk.
Hey the dwarf said nettled. No need to get offended…
You misunderstand Zoltan. Im going to relieve my bladder. Why it even happens to walking legends.
The night was as cold as hell. The horses stamped and snorted and steam belched from their nostrils. Bathed in moonlight Regiss shack seemed utterly as if it could have come from a fairy-tale. It could have been a witchs cottage. Geralt fastened his trousers.
Milva who had left soon after him coughed hesitantly. Her long shadow drew level with his.
Why are you delaying going back? she asked. Did they really annoy you?
No he replied.
Then why the hell are you standing here by yourself in the moonlight?
Im counting.
Huh?
Twelve days have passed since I set out from Brokilon during which Ive travelled around sixty miles. Rumour has it that Ciris in Nilfgaard the capital of the Empire. Which is around two and half thousand miles from here. Simple arithmetic tells me that at this rate Ill get there in a year and four months. What do you say to that?
Nothing Milva said shrugging and coughing again. Im not as good at reckoning as you. I dont know how to read or write at all. Im a foolish simple country girl. No company for you. Nor someone to talk to.
Dont say that.
Its the truth though she said turning away abruptly. Why did you tally up the days and miles? For me to advise you? Cheer you up? Chase away your fear suppress the remorse that torments you worse than the pain in your broken peg? I dont know how! You need another. The one Dandelion was talking about. Intelligent educated. Your beloved.
Dandelions a prattler.
That he is. But he occasionally prattles sense. Lets go back I want to drink some more.
Milva?
What?
You never told me why you decided to ride with me.
You never asked.
Im asking now.
Its too late now. I dont know any more.
Oh youre back at last Zoltan said pleased to see them his voice now sounding quite different. And we just imagine have decided that Regis will continue on our journey with us.
Really? The Witcher looked intently at the barber-surgeon. Whats behind this sudden decision?
Master Zoltan Regis said without lowering his gaze has made me aware that Dillingen has been engulfed by a much more serious war than I understood from the refugees accounts. A return to those parts is totally out of the question and remaining in this wilderness doesnt seem wise. Or travelling alone for that matter.
And we although you dont know us at all look like people you could travel with safely. Was one glance enough for you?
Two the barber-surgeon replied with a faint smile. One at the women youre looking after. And the other at their children.
Zoltan belched loudly and scraped the flask against the bottom of the pail.
Appearances can be deceptive he sneered. Perhaps we intend to sell the women into slavery. Percival do something with this apparatus. Loosen a valve a little or something. We want to drink more and its taking for ever to drip out.
The condenser cant keep up. The liquor will be warm.
Not a problem. The nights cool.
The lukewarm moonshine greatly stimulated the conversation. Dandelion Zoltan and Percival were all ruddy-cheeked and their voices had altered even more–in the case of the poet and the gnome one could now say that they were almost on the verge of gibbering. Ravenous the company were chewing cold horsemeat and nibbling horseradish roots they had found in the cottage–which made their eyes water because the horseradish was as bracing as the hooch. And added passion to the discussion.
Regis gave an expression of astonishment when it turned out that the final destination of the trek was not the enclave of the Mahakam massif the eternal and secure home of the dwarves. Zoltan who had become even more garrulous than Dandelion declared that under no circumstances would he ever return to Mahakam and unburdened himself of his animosity to its ruling regime particularly regarding the politics and absolute rule of Brouver Hoog the Elder of Mahakam and all the dwarven clans.
The old fart! he roared and spat into the hearth of the furnace. To look at him you wouldnt know if he was alive or stuffed. He almost never moves which is just as well because he farts every time he does. You cant understand a word hes saying because his beard and whiskers are stuck together with dried borscht. But he lords it over everyone and everything and everyone has to dance to his tune…
It would be difficult to claim however that Hoogs policies are poor Regis interrupted. For owing to his decisive measures the dwarves distanced themselves from the elves and dont fight alongside the Scoiatael any more. And thanks to that the pogroms have ceased. Thanks to that there have been no punitive expeditions to Mahakam. Prudence in their dealings with humans is bearing fruit.
Bollocks Zoltan said drinking from the flask. In the case of the Squirrels the old fossil wasnt interested in prudence it was because too many youngsters were abandoning work in the mines and the forges and joining the elves to sample freedom and manly adventures in the commandos. When the phenomenon grew to the size of a problem Brouver Hoog took the punks in hand. He couldnt care less about the humans being killed by the Squirrels and he made light of the repression falling on the dwarves because of that–including your infamous pogroms. He didnt give a damn and doesnt give a damn about them because he considers the dwarves whove settled in the cities apostates. And as regards punitive expeditions to Mahakam–dont make me laugh my dears. Theres no threat and never has been because none of the kings would dare lay a finger on Mahakam. Ill go further: even the Nilfgaardians were they to manage to take control of the valleys surrounding the massif wouldnt dare touch Mahakam. Do you know why? Ill tell you: Mahakam is steel; and not just any old steel. Theres coal there theres magnetite ore boundless deposits. Everywhere else its just bog ore.
And they have expertise and technology in Mahakam Percival Schuttenbach interposed. Metallurgy and smelting! Enormous furnaces not some pathetic smelteries. Trip hammers and steam hammers…
There you go Percival neck that Zoltan said handing the gnome the now full flask before you bore us to death with your technology and engineering. Everyone knows about it. But not everyone knows Mahakam exports steel. To the kingdoms but to Nilfgaard too. And should anyone lay a finger on us well wreck the workshops and flood the mines. And then you humans will continue fighting but with oaken staves flint blades and asses jawbones.
You say you have it in for Brouver Hoog and the regime in Mahakam the Witcher observed but youve suddenly started saying we.
I certainly have the dwarf confirmed heatedly. There is something like solidarity isnt there? I admit that pride also plays its part because were cleverer than those stuck-up elves. You cant deny it can you? For a few centuries the elves pretended there werent any humans at all. They gazed up at the sky smelled the flowers and at the sight of a human averted their vulgarly bedaubed eyes. But when that strategy turned out to be ineffective they suddenly roused themselves and took up arms. They decided to kill and be killed. And we? The dwarves? We adapted. No we didnt subordinate ourselves to you dont get that into your heads. We subordinated you. Economically.
To tell the truth Regis chipped in it was easier for you to adapt than it was for the elves. Land and territory is what integrates elves. In your case its the clan. Wherever your clan is thats your homeland. Even if an exceptionally short-sighted king were to attack Mahakam youd flood the mines and head off somewhere else without any regrets. To other distant mountains. Or perhaps to human cities instead.
And why not? Its not a bad life in your cities.
Even in the ghettoes? Dandelion asked gasping after a swig of distillate.
And whats wrong with living in a ghetto? Id prefer to live among my own. What do I need with assimilation?
As long as they let us near the guilds Percival said wiping his nose on his sleeve.
They will eventually the dwarf said with conviction. And if they dont well just bodge our way through or well found our own guilds; and healthy competition will decide.
So it would be safer in Mahakam than in the cities then Regis observed. The cities could go up in flames any second. It would be more judicious to see out the war in the mountains.
Anyone who wishes to can do just that Zoltan said replenishing the flask from the pail. Freedom is dearer to me and you wont find that in Mahakam. You have no idea how the old bugger governs. He recently took it upon himself to regulate what he calls community issues. For example: whether you can wear braces or not. Whether you should eat carp right away or wait until the jelly sets. Whether playing the ocarina is in keeping with our centuries-old dwarven traditions or is a destructive influence of rotten and decadent human culture. How many years you have to work before submitting an application for a permanent wife. Which hand you should wipe your arse with. How far away from the mines youre allowed to whistle. And other issues of vital importance. No boys Im not going to return to Mount Carbon. I have no desire to spend my life at the coalface. Forty years underground assuming firedamp doesnt blow you up first. But weve got other plans now havent we Percival? Weve already secured ourselves a future…
A future a future… the gnome said and emptied the graduated flask. He cleared his nose and looked at the dwarf with a now slightly glazed expression. Dont count our chickens Zoltan. Because they might still nab us and then our futures the gibbet… Or Drakenborg.
Shut your trap the dwarf snapped looking menacingly at him. Youre blabbing!
Scopolamine Regis mumbled softly.
The gnome was rambling. Milva was gloomy. Zoltan having forgotten that hed already done so told everyone about Hoog the old fart and the Elder of Mahakam. Geralt listened having forgotten hed already heard it once. Regis also listened and even added comments utterly unperturbed by the fact that he was the only sober individual in a now very drunk party. Dandelion strummed away on his lute and sang.
No wonder that comely ladies are all so stuck-up
For the taller the tree the harder it is to get up.
Idiot Milva commented. Dandelion was undeterred.
Simply treat a maiden as you would a tree
Whip out your chopper and one-two-three…
A cup… Percival Schuttenbach jabbered. A goblet I mean… Carved from a single piece of milk opal… This big. I found it on the summit of Montsalvat. Its rim was set with jasper and the base was of gold. A sheer marvel…
Dont give him any more spirits Zoltan Chivay said.
Hold on hold on Dandelion said becoming interested also slurring his words somewhat. What happened to that legendary goblet?
I exchanged it for a mule. I needed a mule in order to transport a load… Corundum and crystalline carbon. I had… Err… Lots of it… Hic… A load I mean a heavy load couldnt have moved it without a mule… Why the hell did I need that goblet?
Corundum? Carbon?
Yeah what you call rubies and diamonds. Very… hic… handy…
So I imagine.
… for drill bits and files. For bearings. I had lots of them…
Do you hear Geralt? Zoltan said. He waved a hand and although seated almost fell over. Hes little so he got pissed quickly. Hes dreaming about a shitload of diamonds. Careful now Percival that your dream doesnt come true! Or at least half. And I dont mean the half about diamonds!
Dreams dreams Dandelion mumbled once more. And you Geralt? Have you dreamed of Ciri again? Because you ought to know Regis that Geralt has prophetic dreams! Ciri is the Child of Destiny and Geralt is bound to her by bonds of fate which is why he sees her in his dreams. You also ought to know that were going to Nilfgaard to take back Ciri from Imperator Emhyr who abducted her and wants to marry her. But he can whistle for it the bastard because well rescue her before he knows it! Id tell you something else boys but its a secret. A dreadful deep dark secret… Not a word understood? Not one!
I havent heard anything Zoltan assured him looking impudently at the Witcher. I think an earwig crawled into my ear.
Theres a veritable plague of earwigs Regis agreed pretending to be poking around in his ear.
Were going to Nilfgaard… Dandelion said leaning against the dwarf to keep his balance which turned out to be a bad idea. Which is a secret just like I told you. Its a secret mission!
And ingeniously concealed indeed the barber-surgeon nodded glancing at Geralt who was now white with rage. Not even the most suspicious individual would ever guess the aim of your journey by analysing the direction you are headed.
Milva what is it?
Dont talk to me you drunken fool.
Hey shes crying! Hey look…
Go to hell I said! the archer raised her voice wiping away the tears. Or Ill smack you between the eyes you fucking poetaster… Give me the glass Zoltan…
Ive mislaid it… the dwarf mumbled. Oh here it is. Thanks master barber-surgeon… And where the hell is Schuttenbach?
He went outside. Some time ago. Dandelion I recall you promised youd tell me the story of the Child of Destiny.
All right all right Regis. Ill just have a swig… and Ill tell you everything… About Ciri and about the Witcher… In detail…
Confusion to the whores sons!
Be quiet dwarf! Youll wake up the kids outside the cottage!
Calm down archeress. There you go drink that.
Ah well. Dandelion looked around the shack with a slightly vacant stare. If the Countess de Lettenhove could see me like this…
Who?
Never mind. Bloody hell this moonshine really does loosen the tongue… Geralt shall I pour you another one? Geralt!
Leave him be Milva said. Let him sleep.
The barn on the edge of the village was pounding with music. The rhythm seized them before they arrived filling them with excitement. They began to sway involuntarily in their saddles as their horses walked up firstly to the rhythm of the dull boom of the drum and double bass and then when they were closer to the beat of the melody being played by the fiddles and the pipes. The night was cold the moon shone full and in its glow the barn illuminated by the light shining through gaps in the planks looked like a fairy-tale enchanted castle.
A clamour and a bright glow broken up by the shadows of cavorting couples flooded out from the doorway of the barn.
When they entered the music fell silent dissolving in a long-drawn-out discord. The dancing sweating peasants parted leaving the dirt floor and grouped together by the walls and posts. Ciri walking alongside Mistle saw the eyes of the young women wide with fear; noticed the hard determined glances of the men and lads ready for anything. She heard the growing whispering and growling louder than the cautious skirling of the bagpipes than the fading insect-like droning of violins and fiddles. Whispering. The Rats… The Rats… Robbers…
Fear not Giselher said loudly chucking a plump and chinking purse towards the dumbstruck musicians. Weve come here to make merry. The village fair is open to anyone isnt it?
Wheres the beer? Kayleigh asked shaking a pouch. And wheres the hospitality?
And why is it so quiet here? Iskra asked looking around. We came down from the mountains for a dance. Not for a wake!
One of the peasants finally broke the impasse and walked over to Giselher with a clay mug overflowing with froth. Giselher took it with a bow drank from it and courteously and decorously thanked him. Several peasants shouted enthusiastically. But the others remained silent.
Hey fellows Iskra called again. I see that you need livening up!
A heavy oak table laden with clay mugs stood against one wall of the barn. The she-elf clapped her hands and nimbly jumped onto it. The peasants quickly gathered up the mugs. With a vigorous kick Iskra cleared the ones they were too slow to remove.
Very well musicians she said putting her fists on her hips and shaking her hair. Show me what you can do. Music!
She quickly tapped out a rhythm with her heels. The drum repeated the rhythm and the double bass and oboe followed. The pipes and fiddles took up the tune quickly embellishing it challenging Iskra to adjust her steps and tempo. The she-elf gaudily dressed and as light as a butterfly adapted to it with ease and began moving rhythmically. The peasants began to clap.
Falka! Iskra called narrowing her eyes which were intensified by heavy make-up. Youre swift with a sword! And in the dance? Can you keep step with me?
Ciri freed herself from Mistles arm untied the scarf from around her neck and took off her beret and jacket. With a single bound she was on the table beside the she-elf. The peasants cheered enthusiastically the drum and double bass boomed and the bagpipes wailed plaintively.
Play musicians! Iskra yelled. With verve! And passion!
With her hands on her hips and an upturned head the she-elf tapped her feet cut a caper and beat out a quick rhythmic staccato with her heels. Ciri bewitched by the rhythm copied the steps. The she-elf laughed hopped and changed the tempo. Ciri shook her hair from her forehead with a sudden jerk of her head and copied Iskras movements perfectly. The two girls stepped in unison each the mirror image of the other. The peasants yelled and applauded. The fiddles and violins sang a piercing song tearing the measured solemn rumbling of the double bass and keening of the bagpipes to shreds.
They danced both as straight as a poker arms akimbo touching each others elbows. The iron on their heels beat out the rhythm the table shook and trembled and dust whirled in the light of tallow candles and torches.
Faster! Iskra urged on the musicians. Look lively!
It was no longer music it was a frenzy.
Dance Falka! Abandon yourself to it!
Heel toe heel toe heel step forward and jump shoulders swinging fists on hips heel heel. The table shakes the light shimmers the crowd sways everything sways the entire barn is dancing dancing dancing… The crowd yells Giselher yells Asse yells Mistle laughs claps everyone claps and stamps the barn shudders the earth shudders the world is shaken to its foundations. The world? What world? Theres no world now theres nothing only the dance the dance… Heel toe heel… Iskras elbow… Fever pitch fever pitch… Only the wild playing of the fiddles pipes double bass and bagpipes the drummer raises and lowers his drumsticks but he is now superfluous they beat the rhythm out by themselves. Iskra and Ciri their heels until the table booms and rocks the entire barn booms and rocks… The rhythm the rhythm is them the music is them they are the music. Iskras dark hair flops on her forehead and shoulders. The fiddles strings play a passionate tune reaching fever pitch. Blood pounds in their temples.
Abandon. Oblivion.
I am Falka. I have always been Falka! Dance Iskra! Clap Mistle! The violins and pipes finish the melody on a strident high chord and Iskra and Ciri mark the end of the dance with a simultaneous bang of their heels their elbows still touching. They are both panting quivering het up they suddenly cling to each other they hug they share their sweat their heat and their happiness with each other. The barn explodes with one great bellow and the clapping of dozens of hands.
Falka you she-devil Iskra pants. When we grow tired of robbery well go out into the world and earn a living as dancers…
Ciri also pants. She is unable to say a single word. She just laughs spasmodically. A tear runs down her cheek.
A sudden shout in the crowd a disturbance. Kayleigh shoves a burly peasant hard the peasant shoves Kayleigh back the two of them are caught in the press raised fists fly. Reef jumps in and a dagger flashes in the light of a torch.
No! Stop! Iskra cries piercingly. No brawling! This is a night of dance! She takes Ciri by the hand. They drop from the table to the floor. Musicians play! Whoever wants to show us their paces join us! Well whos feeling brave?
The double bass booms monotonously the long-drawn-out wailing of the bagpipes cuts in to be joined by the high piercing song of the fiddles. The peasants laugh nudge one another overcoming their reserve. One–broad-shouldered and fair-haired–seizes Iskra. A second–younger and slimmer–bows hesitantly in front of Ciri. Ciri haughtily tosses her head but soon smiles in assent. The lad closes his hands around her waist and Ciri places her hands on his shoulders. The touch shoots through her like a flaming arrowhead filling her with throbbing desire.
Look lively musicians!
The barn shudders from the noise vibrates with the rhythm and the melody.
Ciri dances.
A vampire or upir is a dead person brought to life by Chaos. Having lost its first life a v. enjoys its second life during the night hours. It leaves its grave by the light of the moon and only under its light may it act assailing sleeping maidens or young swains who it wakes not but whose blood it sucks.
Physiologus
The peasants consumed garlic in great abundance and for greater certainty hung strings of garlic around their necks. Some womenfolk in particular stopped up their orifices with whole bulbs of garlic. The whole hamlet stank of garlic horrendus so the peasants believed they were safe and that the vampire was incapable of doing them harm. Mighty was their astonishment however when the vampire who flew to their hamlet at midnight was not in the least afraid and simply began to laugh gnashing his teeth in delight and jeering at them.
It is good he said that you have spiced yourselves for I shall soon devour you and seasoned meat is more to my taste. Apply also salt and pepper to yourselves and forget not the mustard.
Sylvester Bugiardo Liber Tenebrarum
or The Book of Fell but Authentic Cases never Explained by Science
The moon shines bright
The vampire alights
Swish swish goes his cloak…
Maiden are you not afeared?
Folk song
CHAPTER FOUR
As usual the birds filled the grey and foggy dawn with an explosion of chirruping in anticipation of the sunrise. As usual the first members of the party ready to set off were the taciturn women from Kernow and their children. Emiel Regis turned out to be equally swift and energetic joining the others with a travelling staff and a leather bag over one shoulder. The rest of the company who had drained the still during the night were not quite so lively. The cool of the morning roused and revived the revellers but failed to thwart the effects of the mandrake moonshine. Geralt awoke in a corner of the shack with his head in Milvas lap. Zoltan and Dandelion lay in each others arms on a pile of mandrake roots snoring so powerfully that they were making the bundles of herbs hanging on the walls flutter. Percival was discovered outside curled up in a ball under a hagberry bush covered by the straw mat Regis normally used to wipe his boots on. The five of them betrayed distinct–but varied–symptoms of fatigue and they all went to soothe their raging thirst at the spring.
However by the time the mists had dissipated and the red ball of the sun was blazing in the tops of the pines and larches of Fen Carn the company were already on their way marching briskly among the barrows. Regis took the lead followed by Percival and Dandelion who kept each others spirits up by singing a two-part ballad about three sisters and an iron wolf. After them trudged Zoltan Chivay leading the chestnut colt by the reins. The dwarf had found a knobbly ashen staff in the barber-surgeons yard which he was now using to whack all the menhirs they passed and wish the long-deceased elves eternal rest while Field Marshal Windbag–who was sitting on his shoulder–puffed up his feathers and occasionally squawked; reluctantly indistinctly and somewhat half-heartedly.
Milva turned out to be the least tolerant to the mandrake distillate. She marched with visible difficulty was sweaty pale and acted like a bear with a sore head not even responding to the twittering of the little girl with the plaits who was riding in the blacks saddle. Geralt thus made no attempt to strike up a conversation not being in the best of shape himself.
The fog and the adventures of the iron wolf sung in loud–though somewhat morning-after–voices meant that they happened upon a small group of peasants suddenly and without warning. The peasants however had heard them much earlier and were waiting standing motionless among the monoliths sunk into the ground their grey homespun coats camouflaging them perfectly. Zoltan Chivay barely avoided whacking one of them with his staff having mistaken him for a tombstone.
Yo-ho-ho!! he shouted. Forgive me good people! I didnt notice you. A good day to you! Greetings!
The dozen peasants murmured an answer to his greeting in an incoherent chorus grimly scrutinising the company. The peasants were clutching shovels picks and six-foot pointed stakes.
Greetings the dwarf repeated. I presume youre from the camp by the Chotla. Am I right?
Rather than answering one of the peasants pointed out Milvas horse to the rest of them.
That black one he said. See it?
The black affirmed another and licked his lips. Oh yes the black. Should do the job.
Eh? Zoltan said noticing their expressions and gestures. Are you referring to our black steed? What about it? Its a horse not a giraffe theres nothing to be astonished about. What are you up to my good fellows in this burial ground?
And you? the peasant asked looking askance at the company. What are you doing here?
Weve bought this land the dwarf said looking him straight in the eye and hitting a menhir with his staff and were pacing it out to check we havent been swindled on the acreage.
And were hunting a vampire!
What?
A vampire the oldest peasant repeated emphatically scratching his forehead beneath a felt cap stiff with grime. He must have his lair somewhere here curse him. We have sharpened these here aspen stakes and now we shall find the scoundrel and run him through so he will never rise again!
And weve holy water in a pot the priest gave us! another peasant called cheerfully pointing to the vessel. Well sprinkle it on the bloodsucker make things hot for him!
Ha ha Zoltan Chivay said with a smile. I see its a proper hunt; full scale and well organised. A vampire you say? Well youre in luck good fellows. We have a vampire specialist in our company a wi…
He broke off and swore under his breath because the Witcher had kicked him hard in the ankle.
Who saw the vampire? Geralt asked hushing his companions with a telling glance. Why do you think you should be looking for him here?
The peasants whispered among themselves.
No one saw him the peasant in the felt cap finally admitted. Or heard him. How can you see him when he flies at night in the dark? How can you hear him when he flies on bats wings without a sound?
We didnt see the vampire added another but there are signs of his ghastly practices. Ever since the moons been full the fiends murdered one of our number every night. Hes already torn two people apart ripped them to shreds. A woman and a stripling. Horrors and terrors! The vampire tore the poor wretches to ribbons and drank all their blood! What are we to do? Stand idly by for a third night?
But who says the culprit is a vampire and not some other predator? Whose idea was it to root around in this burial ground?
The venerable priest told us to. Hes a learned and pious man and thanks be to the Gods he arrived in our camp. He said at once that a vampire was plaguing us. As punishment for weve neglected our prayers and church donations. Now hes reciting prayers and carrying out all kinds of exorcismums in the camp and ordered us to search for the tomb where the undead fiend sleeps during the day.
What here?
And where would a vampires grave be if not in a burial ground? And anyway its an elven burial ground and every toddler knows that elves are a rotten godless race and every second elf is condemned to damnation after death! Elves are to blame for everything!
Elves and barber-surgeons said Zoltan nodding his head seriously. Thats true. Every child knows that. That camp you were talking about is it far from here?
Why no…
Dont tell them too much Father said an unshaven peasant with a shaggy fringe the one who had previously been unfriendly. The devil only knows who they are; theyre a queer-looking band. Come on lets get to work. Let them give us the horse and they can go on their way.
Right you are the older peasant said. Lets not dilly-dally times getting on. Hand over the horse. That black one. We need it to search for the vampire. Get that kid off the saddle lassie.
Milva who had been staring at the sky with a blank expression all along looked at the peasant and her features hardened dangerously.
Talking to me yokel?
What do you think? Give us the black we need it.
Milva wiped her sweaty neck and gritted her teeth and the expression in her tired eyes became truly ferocious.
Whats this all about good people? the Witcher asked smiling and trying to defuse the tense situation. Why do you need this horse? The one you are so politely requesting?
How else are we going to find the vampires grave? Everybody knows you have to ride around a cemetery on a black colt as it will stop by the vampires grave and will not be budged from it. Then you have to dig up the vampire and stab him with an aspen stake. Dont argue with us for were desperate. Its a matter of life and death here. We have to have that black horse!
Will another colour do? Dandelion asked placatingly holding out Pegasuss reins to the peasant.
Not a chance.
Pity for you then Milva said through clenched teeth. Because Im not giving you my horse.
What do you mean you wont? Didnt you hear what we said wench? We have to have it!
You might. But I dont have to give it to you.
We can solve this amicably Regis said in a kind voice. If I understand rightly Miss Milva is reluctant to hand over her horse to a stranger…
You could say that the archer said and spat heartily. I cringe at the very thought.
Both the wolves have eaten much and the sheep have not been touched the barber-surgeon recited calmly. Let Miss Milva mount the horse herself and carry out the necessary circuit of the necropolis.
Im not going to ride around the graveyard like an idiot!
And no ones asking you to wench! said the one with the shaggy fringe. This requires a bold and strong blade; a maids place is in the kitchen bustling around the stove. A wench may come in handy later true enough because a virgins tears are very useful against a vampire; for if you sprinkle a vampire with them he burns up like a firebrand. But the tears must be shed by a pure and untouched wench. And you dont quite look the part love. So youre not much use for anything.
Milva took a quick step forward and her right fist shot out as fast as lightning. There was a crack and the peasants head lurched backwards which meant his bristly throat and chin created an excellent target. The girl took another step and struck straight ahead with the heel of her open hand increasing the force of the blow with a twist of her hips and shoulders. The peasant staggered backwards tripped over his own feet and keeled over banging the back of his head with an audible thud against the menhir.
Now you see what use I am the archer said in a voice trembling with fury rubbing her fist. Whos the blade now and whose place is in the kitchen? Truly theres nothing like a fist-fight which clears everything up. The bold and strong one is still on his feet and the pussy and the milksop is lying on the ground. Am I right yokels?
The peasants didnt hurry to answer but looked at Milva with their mouths wide open. The one in the felt cap knelt down by the one on the ground and slapped him gently on his cheek. In vain.
Killed he wailed raising his head. Dead. How could you wench? How could you just up and kill a man?
I didnt mean to Milva whispered lowering her hands and blenching frightfully. And then she did something no one expected.
She turned away staggered rested her forehead against the menhir and vomited violently.
Whats up with him?
Slight concussion the barber-surgeon replied standing up and fastening his bag. His skulls in one piece. Hes already regained consciousness. He remembers what happened and he knows his own name. Thats a good sign. Miss Milvas intense reaction was fortunately groundless.
The Witcher looked at the archer who was sitting at the foot of the menhir with her eyes staring into the distance.
She isnt a delicate maiden prone to that sort of emotion he muttered. Id be more inclined to blame yesterdays hooch.
Shes puked before Zoltan broke in softly. The day before yesterday at the crack of dawn. While everyone was still asleep. I think its because of those mushrooms we scoffed in Turlough. My guts gave me grief for two days.
Regis looked at the Witcher from under his greying eyebrows with a strange expression on his face smiled mysteriously and wrapped himself in his black woollen cloak. Geralt went over to Milva and cleared his throat.
How do you feel?
Rough. Hows the yokel?
Hell be fine. Hes come round. But Regis wont let him get up. The peasants are making a cradle and well carry him to the camp between two horses.
Take mine.
Were using Pegasus and the chestnut. Theyre more docile. Get up its time we hit the road.
The enlarged company now resembled a funeral procession and crawled along at a funereal pace.
What do you think about this vampire of theirs? Zoltan Chivay asked the Witcher. Do you believe their story?
I didnt see the victims. I cant comment.
Its a pack of lies Dandelion declared with conviction. The peasants said the dead had been torn apart. Vampires dont do that. They bite into an artery and drink the blood leaving two clear fang marks. The victim quite often survives. Ive read about it in a respectable book. There were also illustrations showing the marks of vampire bites on virgins swanlike necks. Can you confirm that Geralt?
What do you want me to confirm? I didnt see those illustrations. Im not very clued up about virgins either.
Dont scoff. You cant be a stranger to vampire bite marks. Ever come across a case of a vampire ripping its victim to shreds?
No. That never happens.
In the case of higher vampires–never I agree Emiel Regis said softly. From what I know alpors katakans moolas bruxas and nosferats dont mutilate their victims. On the other hand fleders and ekimmas are pretty brutal with their victims remains.
Bravo Geralt said looking at him in genuine admiration. You didnt leave out a single class of vampire. Nor did you mention any of the imaginary ones which only exist in fairy-tales. Impressive knowledge indeed. You must also know that ekimmas and fleders are never encountered in this climate.
What happened then? Zoltan snorted swinging his ashen staff. Who mutilated that woman and that lad in this climate then? Or did they mutilate themselves in a fit of desperation?
The list of creatures that may have been responsible is pretty long. Beginning with a pack of feral dogs quite a common affliction during times of war. You cant imagine what dogs like that are capable of. Half the supposed victims of chaotic monsters can actually be chalked up to packs of wild farmyard curs.
Does that mean you rule out monsters?
Not in the least. It may have been a striga a harpy a graveir a ghoul…
Not a vampire?
Unlikely.
The peasants mentioned some priest or other Percival Schuttenbach recalled. Do priests know much about vampires?
Some are expert on a range of subjects to quite an advanced level and their opinions are worth listening to as a rule. Sadly that doesnt apply to all of them.
Particularly the kind that roam around forests with fugitives the dwarf snorted. Hes most probably some kind of hermit an illiterate anchorite from the wilderness. He dispatched a peasant expedition to your burial ground Regis. Have you never noticed a single vampire while you were gathering mandrake there? Not even a tiny one? A teeny-weeny one?
No never the barber-surgeon gave a faint smile. But no wonder. A vampire as youve just heard flies in the dark on bats wings without making a sound. Hes easy to miss.
And easy to see one where it isnt and has never been Geralt confirmed. When I was younger I wasted my time and energy several times chasing after delusions and superstitions which had been seen and colourfully described by an entire village including the headman. Once I spent two months living in a castle which was supposedly haunted by a vampire. There was no vampire. But they fed me well.
No doubt however you have experienced cases when the rumours about vampires were well founded Regis said not looking at the Witcher. In those cases I presume your time and energy were not wasted. Did the monsters die by your sword?
It has been known.
In any event Zoltan said the peasants are in luck. I think well wait in that camp for Munro Bruys and the lads and a rest wont do you any harm either. Whatever killed the woman and the boy I dont fancy its chances when the Witcher turns up in the camp.
While were at it Geralt said pursing his lips Id rather you didnt bruit who I am and what my name is. That particularly applies to you Dandelion.
As you wish the dwarf nodded. You must have your reasons. Lucky youve forewarned us because I can see the camp.
And I can hear it Milva added breaking a lengthy silence. Theyre making a fearful racket.
The sound we can hear Dandelion said playing the wiseacre is the everyday symphony of a refugee camp. As usual scored for several hundred human throats as well as no fewer bovine ovine and anserine ones. The solo parts are being performed by women squabbling children bawling a cock crowing and if Im not mistaken a donkey who someones poked in the backside with a thistle. The title of the symphony is: A human community fights for survival.
The symphony as usual can be heard and smelled Regis observed quivering the nostrils of his noble nose. This community–as it fights for survival–gives off the delicious fragrance of boiled cabbage a vegetable without which survival would apparently be impossible. The characteristic olfactory accent is also being created by the effects of bodily functions carried out in random places most often on the outskirts of the camp. Ive never understood why the fight for survival manifests itself in a reluctance to dig latrines.
To hell with your smart-arsed chatter said Milva in annoyance. Three dozen fancy words when three will do: it stinks of shit and cabbage!
Shit and cabbage always go hand in hand Percival Schuttenbach said pithily. One drives the other. Its perpetuum mobile.
No sooner had they set foot in the noisy and foul-smelling camp among the campfires wagons and shelters than they became the centre of interest of all the fugitives gathered there of which there must have been at least two hundred possibly even more. The interest bore fruit quickly and remarkably; someone suddenly screamed someone else suddenly bellowed someone suddenly flung their arms around someone elses neck someone began to laugh wildly and someone else to sob wildly. There was a huge commotion. At first it was difficult to work out what was happening among the cacophony of men women and children screaming but finally all was explained. Two of the women from Kernow who had been travelling with them had found respectively a husband and a brother whom they had believed to be dead or to missing without trace in the turmoil of war. The delight and tears seemed to be never-ending.
Something so banal and melodramatic Dandelion said with conviction indicating the moving scene could only happen in real life. If I tried to end one of my ballads like that I would be ribbed mercilessly.
Undoubtedly Zoltan confirmed. Nonetheless banalities like these gladden the heart dont they? One feels more cheerful when fortune gives one something rather than only taking. Well weve got rid of the womenfolk. We guided them and guided them and finally got them here. Come on no point hanging around.
For a moment the Witcher felt like suggesting they delay their departure. He was counting on one of the women deciding it would be fitting to express a few words of gratitude and thanks to the dwarf. He abandoned that idea though when he saw no sign of it happening. The women overjoyed at being reunited with their loved ones had completely forgotten about Geralt and his company.
What are you waiting for? Zoltan said looking at him keenly. To be covered in blossom out of gratitude? Or anointed with honey? Lets clear off; theres nothing for us here.
Youre absolutely right.
They didnt get far. A squeaky little voice stopped them in their tracks. The freckle-faced little girl with the plaits had caught them up. She was out of breath and had a large posy of wild flowers in her hand.
Thank you she squeaked for looking after me and my little brother and my mummy. For being kind to us and all that. I picked these flowers for you.
Thank you Zoltan Chivay said.
Youre kind the little girl added sticking the end of her plait into her mouth. I dont believe what auntie said at all. You arent filthy little burrowing midgets. And you arent a grey-haired misfit from hell. And you Uncle Dandelion arent a gobbling turkey. Auntie wasnt telling the truth. And you Auntie Maria arent a slapper with a bow and arrow. Youre Auntie Maria and I like you. I picked the prettiest flowers for you.
Thank you Milva said in a slightly altered voice.
We all thank you Zoltan echoed. Hey Percival you filthy little burrowing midget give the child some token as a farewell present. A souvenir. Have you got a spare stone in one of your pockets?
I have. Take this little miss. Its beryllium aluminium cyclosilicate popularly known as…
An emerald the dwarf finished off the sentence. Dont confuse the child she wont remember anyway.
Oh how pretty! And how green! Thank you very very much!
Enjoy it and may it bring you fortune.
And dont lose it Dandelion muttered. Because that little pebbles worth as much as a small farm.
Get away Zoltan said adorning his cap with the cornflowers the girl had given him. Its only a stone nothing special. Take care of yourself little miss. Lets go and sit down by the ford to wait for Bruys Yazon Varda and the others. They ought to stroll by any time now. Strange they havent shown up yet. I forgot to get the bloody cards off em. I bet theyre sitting somewhere and playing Barrel!
The horses need feeding Milva said. And watering. Lets go towards the river.
Perhaps well happen upon some home-cooked fare Dandelion added. Percival take a gander around the camp and put your hooter to use. Well eat where the food is tastiest.
To their slight amazement the way down to the river was fenced off and under guard. The peasants guarding the watering place were demanding a farthing per horse. Milva and Zoltan were incandescent but Geralt hoping to avoid a scene and the publicity it would lead to calmed them down while Dandelion contributed a few coins he dug from the depths of his pocket.
Soon after Percival Schuttenbach showed up dour and cross.
Found any grub?
The gnome cleared his nose and wiped his fingers on the fleece of a passing sheep.
Yes. But I dont know if we can afford it. They expect to be paid for everything here and the prices will take your breath away. Flour and barley groats are a crown a pound. A plate of thin soups two nobles. A pot of weatherfish caught in the Chotla costs the same as a pound of smoked salmon in Dillingen…
And fodder for the horses?
A measure of oats costs a thaler.
How much? the dwarf yelled. How much?
How much how much Milva snapped. Ask the horses how much. Theyll peg it if we make them nibble grass! And there isnt any here anyway.
There was no way of debating self-evident facts. Attempts at hard bargaining with the peasant selling oats didnt achieve anything either. He relieved Dandelion of the last of his coins and was also treated to a few insults from Zoltan which didnt bother him in the slightest. But the horses enthusiastically stuck their muzzles into the nosebags.
Daylight bloody robbery! the dwarf yelled unloading his anger by aiming blows of his staff at the wheels of passing wagons. Incredible that they let us breathe here for nothing and dont charge a hapenny for each inhalation! Or a farthing for a dump!
Higher physiological needs Regis declared in utter seriousness have a price. Do you see the tarpaulin stretched between those sticks? And the peasant standing alongside? Hes peddling the charms of his own daughter. Price open to negotiation. A moment ago I saw him accepting a chicken.
I predict a bad end for your race humans Zoltan Chivay said grimly. Every sentient creature on this earth when it falls into want poverty and misfortune usually cleaves to his own. Because its easier to survive the bad times in a group helping one another. But you humans you just wait for a chance to make money from other peoples mishaps. When theres hunger you dont share out your food you just devour the weakest ones. This practice works among wolves since it lets the healthiest and strongest individuals survive. But among sentient races selection of that kind usually allows the biggest bastards to survive and dominate the rest. Come to your own conclusions and make your own predictions.
Dandelion forcefully protested giving examples of even greater scams and self-seeking among the dwarves but Zoltan and Percival drowned him out simultaneously and loudly imitating with their lips the long-drawn-out sounds which accompany farting by both races considered an expression of disdain for ones adversarys arguments in a dispute.
The sudden appearance of a small group of peasants led by their friend the vampire hunter the old chap in the felt cap brought an end to the quarrel.
Its about Cloggy one of the peasants said.
We arent buying anything the dwarf and the gnome snapped in unison.
The one whose head you split open another peasant quickly explained. We were planning to get him married off.
Weve got nothing against that Zoltan said angrily. We wish him and his new bride all the best. Good health happiness and prosperity.
And lots of little Cloggies Dandelion added.
Just a moment the peasant said. You may laugh but how are we to get him hitched? For ever since you whacked him in the head hes been totally dazed and cant tell day from night.
It isnt that bad Milva grunted eyes fixed on the ground. He seems to be doing better. That is much better than he was early this morning.
Ive got no idea how Cloggy was early this morning the peasant retorted. But I just saw him standing in front of an upright thill saying what a beauty she was. But never mind. Ill say it briefly: pay up the blood money.
What?
When a knight kills a peasant he must pay blood money. So says the law.
Im not a knight! Milva yelled.
Thats one thing Dandelion said in her defence. And for another it was an accident. And for a third Cloggys alive so blood moneys out of the question. The most you can expect is compensation namely redress. But for a fourth were penniless.
So hand over your horses.
Hey Milva said her eyes narrowing malevolently. You must be out of your mind yokel. Mind you dont go too far.
Motherrfuccckkerr! Field Marshal Windbag squawked.
Ah the birds hit the nail on the head Zoltan Chivay drawled tapping his axe which was stuck into his belt. You ought to know tillers of the soil that I also dont have the best opinion about the mothers of individuals who think of nothing but profit even if they plan to make money out of their mates cracked skull. Be off with you people. If you go away forthwith I promise I wont come after you.
If you dont want to pay let the authorities arbitrate.
The dwarf ground his teeth and was just reaching for his battle-axe when Geralt seized him by the elbow.
Calm down. How do you want to solve this problem? By killing them all?
Why kill them right away? Its enough to cripple them good and proper.
Thats enough darn it the Witcher hissed and then turned to the peasant. These authorities you were talking about; who are they?
Our camp elder Hector Laabs the headman from Breza one of the villages that was burnt down.
Lead us to him then. Well come to some agreement.
Hes busy at present the peasant announced. Hes sitting in judgement on a witch. There do you see that crowd by the maple? Theyve caught a hag who was in league with a vampire.
Here we go again Dandelion snorted spreading his arms. Did you hear that? When they arent digging up cemeteries theyre hunting witches supposedly vampires accomplices. Folks perhaps instead of ploughing sowing and harvesting youll become witchers.
Joke as much as you like the peasant said and laugh all you want but theres a priest here and priests are more trustworthy than witchers. The priest said that vampires always carry out their practices in league with witches. The witch summons the vampire and points out the victim to him then blinds everyones eyes so they wont see anything.
And it turned out it was indeed like that a second one added. We were harbouring a treacherous hag among us. But the priest saw through her witchcraft and now were going to burn her.
What else the Witcher muttered. Very well well take a look at your court. And well talk to the elder about the accident that befell the unfortunate Cloggy. Well think about suitable compensation. Right Percival? Ill wager that well find another pebble in one of your pockets. Lead on good people.
The procession set off towards a spreading maple. The ground beneath it was indeed teeming with excited people. The Witcher having purposely slowed his pace tried to strike up a conversation with one of the peasants who looked reasonably normal.
Whos this witch theyve captured? Was she really engaged in black magic?
Well sir the peasant mumbled I couldnt say. That wench is a waif a stranger. To my mind shes not quite right in the head. Grown-up but still only plays with the nippers as if she was a child herself; ask her something and she wont say a word. Everyone says she consorted with a vampire and hexed people.
Everyone except the suspect said Regis who until then had been walking quietly beside the Witcher. Because she if asked wouldnt utter a word. Im guessing.
There was not enough time for a more detailed investigation because they were already under the maple. They made their way through the crowd not without the help of Zoltan and his ashen staff.
A girl of about sixteen had been tied to the rack of a wagon laden with sacks her arms spread wide apart. The girls toes barely reached the ground. Just as they arrived her shift and blouse were torn away to reveal thin shoulders. The captive reacted by rolling her eyes and loosing a foolish combination of giggling and sobbing.
A fire had been started directly alongside the wagon. Someone had fanned the coals well and someone else had used pincers to place some horseshoes in the glowing embers. The excited cries of the priest rose above the crowd.
Vile witch! Godless female! Confess the truth! Ha just look at her people shes overindulged in some devilish herbs! Just look at her! Witchery is written all over her countenance!
The priest who spoke those words was thin and his face was as dark and dry as a smoked fish. His black robes hung loosely on his skinny frame. A sacred symbol glistened on his neck. Geralt didnt recognise which deity it represented and anyway he wasnt an expert. The pantheon which in recent times had been growing quickly did not interest him much. The priest must however have belonged to one of the newer religious sects. The older ones were concerned with more useful matters than catching girls tying them to wagons and inciting superstitious mobs against them.
Since the dawn of time woman has been the root of all evil! The tool of Chaos the accomplice in a conspiracy against the world and the human race! Woman is governed only by carnal lust! That is why she so willingly serves demons in order to slake her insatiable urges and her unnatural wantonness!
Well soon learn more about women Regis muttered. This a phobia in a pure clinical form. The devout man must often dream about a vagina dentata.
Ill wager its worse Dandelion murmured. Im absolutely certain that even when hes awake he dreams about a regular toothless one. And the semen has affected his brain.
But its this feeble-minded girl who will have to pay for it.
Unless we can find someone Milva growled wholl stop that black-robed ass.
Dandelion looked meaningfully and hopefully at the Witcher but Geralt avoided his gaze.
And of what if not female witchery are our current calamities and misfortunes the result? the priest continued to yell. For no one else but the sorceresses betrayed the kings on the Isle of Thanedd and concocted the assassination of the King of Redania! Indeed no one else but the elven witch of Dol Blathanna is sending Squirrels after us! Now you see to what evil the familiarity with sorceresses has led us! And the tolerance of their vile practices! Turning a blind eye to their wilfulness their impudent hubris their wealth! And who is to blame? The kings! The vainglorious kings renounced the Gods drove away the priests took away their offices and seats on councils and showered the loathsome sorceresses with honours and gold! And now we all suffer the consequences!
Aha! There lies the rub Dandelion said. You were wrong Regis. It was all about politics and not vaginas.
And about money Zoltan Chivay added.
Verily the priest roared I say unto you before we join battle with Nilfgaard let us first purge our own house of these abominations! Scorch this abscess with a white-hot iron! Subject it to a baptism of fire! We shall not allow any woman who dabbles in witchcraft to live!
We shall not allow it! Burn her at the stake! yelled the crowd.
The girl who was bound to the wagon laughed hysterically and rolled her eyes.
All right all right easy does it said a lugubrious peasant of immense size who until that moment had been silent and around whom was gathered a small group of similarly silent men and several grim-faced women. Weve only heard squawking so far. Everyones capable of squawking even crows. We expect more from you venerable father than we would from a crow.
Do you refute my words Elder Laabs? The words of a priest?
Im not refitting anything the giant replied then he spat on the ground and hitched up a pair of coarse britches. That wench is an orphan and a stray no family of mine. If it turns out that she is in league with a vampire take her and kill her. But while Im the elder of this camp only the guilty will be punished here. If you want to punish her first establish her guilt.
That I shall! the priest screamed giving a sign to his stooges the same ones who had previously put the horseshoes into the fire. Ill show you incontrovertibly! You Laabs and everyone else present here!
His stooges brought out a small blackened cauldron with a curved handle from behind the wagon and set it on the ground.
Here is the proof! the priest roared kicking the cauldron over. A thin liquid spilt onto the ground depositing some small pieces of carrots some strips of unrecognisable greens and several small bones onto the sand. The witch was brewing a magic concoction! An elixir which enabled her to fly through the air to her vampire-lover. To have immoral relations with him and hatch more iniquities! I know the ways and deeds of sorcerers and I know what that decoct is made of! The witch boiled up a cat alive!
The crowd oohed and aahed in horror.
Ghastly Dandelion said shuddering. Boiling a creature alive? I felt sorry for the girl but she went a bit too far…
Shut your gob Milva hissed.
Here is the proof! the priest yelled holding up a small bone he had removed from the steaming puddle. Here is the irrefutable proof! A cats bone!
Thats a birds bone Zoltan Chivay said coldly squinting. Its a jays I would say or a pigeons. The girl cooked herself some broth and thats that!
Silence you pagan imp! the priest roared. Dont blaspheme or the Gods will punish you at the hands of the pious! The brew came from a cat I tell you!
From a cat! Without doubt a cat! the peasants surrounding the priest yelled. The wench had a cat! A black cat! Everyone knew she did! It followed her around everywhere! And where is that cat now? Its gone! Gone into the pot!
Cooked! Boiled up as a potion!
Right you are! The witch has cooked up the cat into a potion!
No other proof is needed! Into the fire with the witch! But first torture her! Let her confess everything!
 Kin ell! Field Marshal Windbag squawked.
Its a shame about that cat Percival Schuttenbach suddenly said in a loud voice. It was a fine beast sleek and fat. Fur shining like anthracite eyes like two chrysoberyls long whiskers and a tail as thick as a mechanicals tool! Everything you could want in a cat. He must have caught plenty of mice!
The peasants fell silent.
And how would you know Master Gnome? someone asked. How do you know what the cat looked like?
Percival Schuttenbach cleared his nose and wiped his fingers on a trouser leg.
Because hes sitting over there on a cart. Right behind you.
The peasants all turned around at once muttering as they observed the cat sitting on a pile of bundles. The cat meanwhile utterly unconcerned about being the centre of attention stuck a hind leg up in the air and got down to licking his rump.
Thus it has turned out Zoltan Chivay said breaking the silence that your irrefutable proof is a load of crap reverend. What will the next proof be? Perhaps a she-cat? That would be good. Then well put them together theyll produce a litter and not a single rodent will come within half an arrows shot of the granary.
Several peasants snorted and several others including Elder Laabs cackled openly. The priest turned purple with rage.
I will remember you blasphemer! he roared pointing a finger at the dwarf. O heathen kobold! O creature of darkness! How did you come to be here? Perhaps you are in collusion with the vampire? Just wait; well punish the witch and then well interrogate you! But first well try the witch! Horseshoes have already been put on the coals so well see what the sinner reveals when her hideous skin starts to sizzle! I tell you she will confess to the crimes of witchcraft herself. And what more proof is there than a confession?
Oh she will she will Hector Laabs said. And were red-hot horseshoes placed against the soles of your feet reverend you would surely even confess to immoral coition with a mare. Ugh! Youre a godly man but you sound like a rascal!
Yes Im a godly man! the priest bellowed outshouting the intensifying murmurs of the peasants. I believe in divine judgement! And in a divine trial! Let the witch face trial by ordeal…
Excellent idea the Witcher interrupted loudly stepping out from the crowd.
The priest glared at him. The peasants stopped muttering and stared at him with mouths agape.
Trial by ordeal Geralt repeated to complete silence from the crowd is utterly certain and utterly just. The verdicts of trial by ordeal are also accepted by secular courts and have their own principles. These rules say that in the case of a charge against a woman child old or otherwise enfeebled person a defence counsel may represent them. Am I right Elder Laabs? So I hereby offer myself in that role. Mark off the circle. Whomsoever is certain of the girls guilt and is not afraid of trial of ordeal should step forward and do battle with me.
Ha! the priest called still glaring at him. Dont be too cunning noble stranger. Throwing down the gauntlet? Its clear at once you are a swordsman and a killer! You wish to conduct a trial of ordeal with your criminal sword?
If the sword doesnt suit you your reverence Zoltan Chivay announced in a drawling voice standing alongside Geralt and if you object to this gentleman perhaps I would be more suitable. By all means may the girls accuser take up a battle-axe against me.
Or challenge me at archery Milva said narrowing her eyes and also stepping forward. A single arrow each at a hundred paces.
Do you see people how quickly defenders of the witch are springing up? the priest screamed and then turned away and contorted his face into a cunning smile. Very well you good-for-nothings I invite all three of you to the trial by ordeal which will soon take place. We shall establish the hags guilt and test your virtue at one and the same time! But not using swords battle-axes lances or arrows! You know you say the rules? I also know them! See the horseshoes in the coals glowing white-hot? Baptism of fire! Come O minions of witchcraft! Whomsoever removes a horseshoe from the fire brings it to me and betrays no marks of burning will have proven that the witch is innocent. If though the trial of ordeal reveals something else then it shall be death to all of you and to her! I have spoken!
The hostile rumble of Elder Laabs and his group was drowned out by the enthusiastic cries of most of the people gathered behind the priest. The mob had already scented excellent sport and entertainment. Milva looked at Zoltan Zoltan at the Witcher and the Witcher first at the sky and then at Milva.
Do you believe in the Gods? he asked in hushed tones.
Yes I do the archer snapped back softly looking at the glowing coals. But I dont think theyll want to be bothered by red-hot horseshoes.
Its no more than three paces from the fire to that bastard Zoltan hissed through clenched teeth. Ill get through it somehow I worked in a foundry… But if you wouldnt mind praying to your Gods for me…
One moment Emiel Regis said placing a hand on the dwarfs shoulder. Please withhold your prayers.
The barber-surgeon walked over to the fire bowed to the priest and the audience then stooped rapidly and put his hand into the hot coals. The crowd screamed as one Zoltan cursed and Milva dug her fingers into Geralts arm. Regis straightened up calmly looked down at the white-hot horseshoe he was holding and walked unhurriedly over to the priest. The priest took a step back bumping into the peasants standing behind him.
This was the idea if Im not mistaken your reverence. Regis said holding up the horseshoe. Baptism of fire? If so I believe the divine judgement is unambiguous. The girl is innocent. Her defenders are innocent. And I just imagine am also innocent.
Sh… sh… show me your hand… the priest mumbled. Is it not burnt?
The barber-surgeon smiled his usual smile with pursed lips then moved the horseshoe to his left hand and showed his right hand totally unharmed first to the priest and then holding it up high to everyone else. The crowd roared.
Whose horseshoe is it? Regis asked. Let the owner take it back.
No one came forward.
Its a devilish trick! the priest bellowed. You are a sorcerer yourself or the devil incarnate!
Regis threw the horseshoe onto the ground and turned around.
Carry out an exorcism on me then he suggested coldly. You are free to do so. But the trial of ordeal has taken place. I have heard though that to question its verdict is heresy.
Perish. Be gone! the priest shrieked waving an amulet in front of the barber-surgeons nose and tracing cabbalistic signs with his other hand. Be gone to the abyss of hell devil! May the earth be riven asunder beneath you…
That is enough! Zoltan shouted angrily. Hey people! Elder Laabs! Do you intend to stand and watch this foolishness any longer? Do you intend…?
The dwarfs voice was drowned out by a piercing cry.
Niiiilfgaaaaaard!
Cavalry from the west! Horsemen! Nilfgaard are attacking! Every man for himself!
In one moment the camp was transformed into total pandemonium. The peasants charged towards their wagons and shelters knocking each other down and trampling on each other. A single great cry rose up into the sky.
Our horses! Milva yelled making room around herself with punches and kicks. Our horses Witcher! Follow me quickly!
Geralt! Dandelion shouted. Save me!
The crowd separated them scattered them like a great wave and carried Milva away in the blink of an eye. Geralt gripping Dandelion by the collar didnt allow himself to be swept away for just in time he caught hold of the wagon which the girl accused of witchcraft was tied to. The wagon however suddenly lurched and moved off and the Witcher and the poet fell to the ground. The girl jerked her head and began to laugh hysterically. As the wagon receded the laughter became quieter and was then lost among the uproar.
Theyll trample us! Dandelion shouted from the ground. Theyll crush us! Heeeelp!
 Kiiin ell! Field Marshal Windbag squawked from somewhere out of sight.
Geralt raised his head spat out some sand and saw a chaotic scene.
Only four people did not panic although to tell the truth one of them simply had no choice. That was the priest unable to move owing to his neck being held in the iron grip of Hector Laabs. The two other individuals were Zoltan and Percival. The gnome lifted up the priests robe at the back with a rapid movement and the dwarf armed with the pincers seized a red-hot horseshoe from the fire and dropped it down the saintly mans long johns. Freed from Laabss grip the priest shot straight ahead like a comet with a smoking tail but his screams were drowned in the roar of the crowd. Geralt saw Laabs the gnome and the dwarf about to congratulate one another on a successful ordeal by fire when another wave of panic-stricken peasants descended upon them. Everything disappeared in clouds of dust. The Witcher could no longer see anything though neither did he have time to watch since he was busy rescuing Dandelion whose legs had been swept from under him again by a stampeding hog. When Geralt bent down to lift the poet up a hay rack was thrown straight on his back from a wagon rattling past. The weight pinned him to the ground and before he was able to throw it off a dozen people ran across it. When he finally freed himself another wagon overturned with a bang and a crash right alongside and three sacks of wheaten flour–costing a crown a pound in the camp–fell onto him. The sacks split open and the world vanished in a white cloud.
Get up Geralt! the troubadour yelled. Get on your blasted feet!
I cant the Witcher groaned blinded by the precious flour seizing in both hands his knee which had been shot through by an overwhelming pain. Save yourself. Dandelion…
I wont leave you!
Gruesome screams could be heard from the western edge of the camp mixed up with the thud of iron-shod hooves and the neighing of horses. The screaming and tramping of hooves intensified suddenly and the ringing clanging and banging of metal striking against metal joined it.
Its a battle! the poet shouted. Its war!
Whos fighting who? Geralt asked trying desperately to clean the flour and chaff from his eyes. Not far away something was on fire and they were engulfed by a wave of heat and a cloud of foul-smelling smoke. The hoofbeats rose in their ears and the earth shuddered. The first thing he saw in the cloud of dust were dozens of horses fetlocks crashing up and down. All around him. He fought off the pain.
Get under the wagon! Hide under the wagon Dandelion or theyll trample us!
Lets stay still… the poet whimpered flattened against the ground. Lets just lie here… Ive heard a horse will never tread on a person lying on the ground…
Im not sure Geralt exhaled if every horse has heard that. Under the wagon! Quickly!
At that moment one of the horses unaware of human proverbs kicked him in the side of the head as it thundered by. Suddenly all the constellations of the firmament flashed red and gold in the Witchers eyes and a moment later the earth and the sky were engulfed in impenetrable darkness.
The Rats sprang up awoken by a long-drawn-out scream that boomed with an intensifying echo around the walls of the cave. Asse and Reef seized their swords and Iskra swore loudly as she banged her head on a rocky protrusion.
What is it? Kayleigh yelled. Whats happening?
It was dark in the cave even though the sun was shining outside–the Rats had been sleeping off a night spent in the saddle fleeing from pursuers. Giselher shoved a brand into the glowing embers lit it held it up and walked over to where Ciri and Mistle were sleeping as usual away from the rest of the gang. Ciri was sitting with her head down and Mistle had her arm around her.
Giselher lifted the flaming brand higher. The others also approached. Mistle covered Ciris naked shoulders with a fur.
Listen Mistle the leader of the Rats said gravely. Ive never interfered with what you two do in a single bed. Ive never said a nasty or mocking word. I always try to look the other way and not notice. Its your business and your tastes and nobody elses as long as you do it discreetly and quietly. But this time you went a little too far.
Dont be stupid Mistle exploded. Are you trying to say that…? She was screaming in her sleep! It was a nightmare!
Dont yell. Falka?
Ciri nodded.
Was your dream so dreadful? What was it about?
Leave her in peace!
Give it a rest Mistle. Falka?
Someone someone I once knew Ciri stammered was being trampled by horses. The hooves… I felt them crushing me… I felt his pain… In my head and knee… I can still feel it. Im sorry I woke you up.
Dont be sorry Giselher said looking at Mistles stern expression. You two deserve the apology. Forgive me. And the dream? Why anybody could have dreamed that. Anybody.
Ciri closed her eyes. She wasnt certain if Giselher was right.
He was awoken by a kick.
He was lying with his head against a wheel of the overturned cart with Dandelion hunched up alongside him. He had been kicked by a foot soldier in a padded jacket and a round helmet. A second stood beside him. They were both holding the reins of horses the saddles of which were hung with crossbows and shields.
Bloody millers or what?
The other soldier shrugged. Geralt saw that Dandelion couldnt take his eyes off the shields. Geralt himself had already noticed that there were lilies on them. The emblem of the Kingdom of Temeria. Other mounted crossbowmen–who were swarming around nearby–also bore the same arms. Most of them were busy catching horses and stripping the dead. The latter mainly wore black Nilfgaardian cloaks.
The camp was still a smoking ruin after the attack but peasants who had survived and hadnt fled very far were beginning to reappear. The mounted crossbowmen with Temerian lilies were rounding them up with loud shouts.
Neither Milva Zoltan Percival nor Regis were anywhere to be seen.
The hero of the recent witchcraft trial the black tomcat sat alongside the cart dispassionately looking at Geralt with his greenish-golden eyes. The Witcher was a little surprised since ordinary cats couldnt bear his presence. He had no time to reflect on this unusual phenomenon since one of the soldiers was prodding him with the shaft of his lance.
Get up you two! Hey the grey-haired one has a sword!
Drop your weapon! the other one shouted attracting the attention of the rest. Drop your sword on the ground. Right now or Ill stick you with my glaive.
Geralt obeyed. His head was ringing.
Who are you?
Travellers Dandelion said.
Sure you are the soldier snorted. Are you travelling home? After fleeing from your standard and throwing away your uniforms? There are plenty of travellers like that in this camp whove taken fright at Nilfgaard and lost the taste for army bread! Some of them are old friends of ours. From our regiment!
Those travellers can expect another trip now his companion cackled. A short one! Upwards on a rope!
We arent deserters! the poet yelled.
Well find out who you are. When you account for yourselves to the officer.
A unit of light horse led by several armoured cavalrymen with splendid plumes on their helmets emerged from the ring of mounted crossbowmen.
Dandelion looked closely at the knights brushed the flour off himself and tidied up his clothing then spat on a hand and smoothed down his dishevelled hair.
Geralt keep quiet he forewarned. Ill parley with them. Theyre Temerian knights. They defeated the Nilfgaardians. They wont do anything to us. I know how to talk to the knighthood. You have to show them they arent dealing with commoners but with equals.
Dandelion for the love of…
Never fear everything will be fine. I have a lot of experience in talking to the knighthood and the nobility; half of Temeria know me. Hey out of our way servants step aside! I wish to speak with your superiors!
The soldiers looked on hesitantly and then raised their couched lances and made room. Dandelion and Geralt moved towards the knights. The poet strode proudly bearing a lordly expression which was somewhat out of place considering his frayed and flour-soiled tunic.
Stop! one of the armoured men yelled at him. Not another step! Who are you?
Who should I tell? Dandelion said putting his hands on his hips. And why? Who are these well-born lords that they oppress innocent travellers?
You dont ask the questions riffraff! You answer them!
The troubadour inclined his head and looked at the coats of arms on the knights shields and tabards.
Three red hearts on a golden field he observed. That means you are an Aubry. Theres a three-pointed label on the shields chief so you must be the eldest son of Anzelm Aubry. I know your pater well good Sir Knight. And you strident Sir Knight what do you have on your silver shield? A black stripe between two gryphons heads? The Papebrock familys coat of arms if Im not mistaken and I am rarely mistaken in matters of this kind. The stripe they say illustrates the acuity possessed by that familys members.
Will you bloody stop Geralt groaned.
Im the celebrated poet Dandelion! the bard said puffing himself up and paying no attention to the Witcher. No doubt youve heard of me? Lead me then to your commander to the seigneur for Im accustomed to speaking with equals!
The knights did not react but their facial expressions became more and more uncongenial and their iron gloves gripped their decorated bridles more and more tightly. Dandelion clearly hadnt noticed.
Well whats the matter with you? he asked haughtily. What are you staring at? Yes Im talking to you Sir Black Stripe! Why are you making faces? Did someone tell you that if you narrow your eyes and stick your lower jaw out you look manly doughty dignified and menacing? Well they deceived you. You look like someone who hasnt had a decent shit for a week!
Seize them! yelled the eldest son of Anzelm Aubry–the bearer of the shield with three hearts–to the foot soldiers. The Black Stripe from the Papebrock family spurred his steed.
Seize them! Bind the blackguards!
They walked behind the horses pulled by ropes attaching their wrists to the pommels. They walked and occasionally ran because the horsemen spared neither their mounts nor their captives. Dandelion fell over twice and was dragged along on his belly yelling pathetically. He was stood up again and urged on roughly with the lance shaft. And then driven on once more. The dust choked and blinded them making their eyes water and their noses tingle. Thirst parched their throats.
Only one thing was encouraging; the road they were being driven along was heading south. Geralt was thus journeying in the right direction at last and pretty quickly at that. He wasnt happy though. Because he had imagined the journey would be altogether different.
They arrived at their destination just as Dandelion had made himself hoarse from curses peppered with cries for mercy while the pain in Geralts elbow and knee had become sheer torment–so severe that the Witcher had begun to consider taking radical or even desperate measures.
They reached a military camp organised around a ruined half-burnt stronghold.
Beyond the ring of guards hitching bars and smoking campfires they saw knights tents adorned with pennants surrounding a large and bustling field beyond a ruined and charred stockade. The field marked the end of their forced trek.
Seeing a horse trough Geralt and Dandelion strained against their bonds. The horsemen were initially disinclined to let them go anywhere near the water but Anzelm Aubrys son evidently recalled the supposed acquaintance of Dandelion and his father and deigned to be kind. They forced their way between the horses and drank and washed their faces using their bound hands. A tug of the ropes soon brought them back to reality.
Whove you brought me this time? said a tall slim knight in enamelled richly gilded armour rhythmically striking a mace against an ornamented tasset. Dont tell me its more spies.
Spies or deserters Anzelm Aubrys son stated. We captured them in the camp by the Chotla when we wiped out the Nilfgaardian foray. Clearly a suspicious element!
The knight in the gilded armour snorted looked intently at Dandelion and then his young–but austere–face suddenly lit up.
Nonsense. Untie them.
Theyre Nilfgaardian spies! Black Stripe of the Papebrocks said indignantly. Particularly this one here as insolent as a country cur. Says hes a poet the rogue!
And he speaks the truth the knight in the gilded armour smiled. Its the bard Dandelion. I know him. Remove his bonds. And free the other one too.
Are you sure My Lord?
That was an order Knight Papebrock.
Didnt realise I could come in useful did you? said Dandelion to Geralt while he rubbed his wrists which were numb from the bonds. So now you do. My fame goes before me Im known and esteemed everywhere.
Geralt didnt comment being busy massaging his own wrists his sore elbow and knee.
Please forgive the overzealousness of these youngsters said the knight who had been addressed as a member of the nobility. They see Nilfgaardian spies everywhere bring back a few suspicious-looking types every time theyre sent out. I mean anybody who in any way stands out from the fleeing rabble. And you Master Dandelion stand out after all. How did you end up by the Chotla among those fugitives?
I was travelling from Dillingen to Maribor the poet lied with ease when we were caught up in this hell me and my… confrere. Youre sure to know him. His name is… Giraldus.
But of course I do Ive read him the knight bragged. Its an honour for me Master Giraldus. I am Daniel Etcheverry Count of Garramone. Upon my word Master Dandelion much has changed since the times you sang at King Foltests court.
Much indeed.
Who would have thought the count said his face darkening that it would come to this. Verden subjugated to Emhyr Brugge practically defeated Sodden in flames… And were in retreat in constant retreat… My apologies I meant to say we are executing tactical withdrawals. Nilfgaard are burning and pillaging everywhere. They have almost reached the banks of the Ina have almost completed the sieges of the fortresses of Mayena and Razwan and the Temerian Army continues its tactical withdrawals…
When I saw the lilies on your shields by the Chotla Dandelion said I thought the offensive was here.
A counter-attack Daniel Etcheverry corrected him and reconnaissance in force. We crossed the Ina put to the sword a few Nilfgaardian forays and Scoiatael commandos who were lighting fires. You can see what remains of the garrison in Armeria who we managed to free. But the forts in Carcano and Vidort were burnt to the ground… The entire south is soaked in blood afire and dense with smoke… Oh but Im boring you. You know only too well whats happening in Brugge and Sodden. After all you ended up wandering with fugitives from there. And my brave boys took you for spies! Please accept my apologies one more time. And my invitation to dinner. Some of the noblemen and officers will be delighted to meet you Master Poets.
It is a genuine honour My Lord said Geralt bowing stiffly. But time is short. We must be away.
Oh please dont be shy Daniel Etcheverry said smiling. A standard modest soldiers repast. Venison grouse sterlet truffles…
To decline Dandelion said swallowing and giving the Witcher a telling glance would be a serious affront. Let us go without delay My Lord. Is that your tent the sumptuous one in blue and gold?
No. That is the commander-in-chiefs. Azure and gold are the colours of his fatherland.
Really? Dandelion said in astonishment. I thought this was the Temerian Army. And that you were in command.
This is a regiment assigned to the Temerian Army. I am King Foltests liaison officer and a goodly number of the Temerian nobility are serving here with detachments which bear lilies on their shields as a formality. But the main part of this corps consists of the subjects of another kingdom. Do you see the standard in front of the tent?
Lions Geralt said stopping. Golden lions on a blue field. Thats… Thats the emblem…
Of Cintra the count averred. They are emigrants from the Kingdom of Cintra at present occupied by Nilfgaard. Under the command of Marshal Vissegerd.
Geralt turned back intending to announce to the count that urgent matters were nonetheless compelling him to decline the venison sterlet and truffles. He wasnt quick enough. He saw some men approaching led by a well-built big-bellied grey-haired knight in a blue cloak with a gold chain over his armour.
Here Master Poets is Marshal Vissegerd in person Daniel Etcheverry said. Allow me Your Lordship to introduce you to…
That wont be necessary Marshal Vissegerd interrupted hoarsely looking piercingly at Geralt. We have already been introduced. In Cintra at the court of Queen Calanthe. On the day of Princess Pavettas betrothal. It was fifteen years ago but I have a good memory. And you you rogue of a witcher? Do you remember me?
Indeed I do Geralt said nodding obediently holding out his hands for the soldiers to bind.
Daniel Etcheverry Count of Garramone had tried to vouch for them when the infantrymen were sitting the trussed-up Geralt and Dandelion down on stools in the tent and now after the soldiers had left on the orders of Marshal Vissegerd the count renewed his efforts.
That is the poet and troubadour Dandelion marshal he repeated. I know him. The whole world knows him. I consider it unfitting to treat him thus. I pledge my knightly word he is not a Nilfgaardian spy.
Dont make such rash pledges Vissegerd snarled without taking his eyes off the captives. Perhaps he is a poet but if he was captured in the company of that blackguard the Witcher I wouldnt vouch for him. It seems to me you still have no idea what kind of bird weve ensnared.
The Witcher?
Indeed. Geralt also known as the Wolf. The very same good-for-nothing who claimed the right to Cirilla the daughter of Pavetta and the granddaughter of Calanthe; the very same Ciri about whom everyone is talking at present. You are too young My Lord to remember the time when that scandal was being widely discussed at many courts. But I as it happens was an eyewitness.
But what could link him to Princess Cirilla?
That scoundrel there Vissegerd said pointing at Geralt played his part in giving Pavetta the daughter of Queen Calanthe in marriage to Duny a totally unknown stranger from the south. From that mongrel union was subsequently born Cirilla the subject of their reprehensible conspiracy. For you ought to know that Duny the bastard had promised the girl to the Witcher in advance as payment for facilitating his marriage. The Law of Surprise do you see?
Not entirely. But speak on My Lord Marshal.
The Witcher Vissegerd said pointing a finger at Geralt once again wanted to take the girl away after Pavettas death but Calanthe did not permit him and drove him away. But he waited for a timely moment. When the war with Nilfgaard broke out and Cintra fell he kidnapped Ciri exploiting the confusion. He kept the girl hidden although he knew we were searching for her. And finally he grew tired of her and sold her to Emhyr!
Those are lies and calumny! Dandelion yelled. There is not a word of truth in it!
Quiet fiddler or Ill have you gagged. Put two and two together My Lord. The Witcher had Cirilla and now Emhyr var Emreis has her. And the Witcher gets captured in the vanguard of a Nilfgaardian raid. What does that signify?
Daniel Etcheverry shrugged his shoulders.
What does it signify? Vissegerd repeated bending over Geralt. Well you rascal? Speak! How long have you been spying for Nilfgaard cur?
I do not spy for anybody.
Ill have your hide tanned!
Go ahead.
Master Dandelion the Count of Garramone suddenly interjected. It would probably be better if you set about explaining. The sooner the better.
I would have done so before the poet exploded but My Lord Marshal here threatened to gag me! We are innocent; those are all outright fabrications and vile slanders. Cirilla was kidnapped from the Isle of Thanedd and Geralt was seriously wounded defending her. Anybody can confirm that. Every sorcerer who was on Thanedd. And Redanias secretary of state Sigismund Dijkstra…
Dandelion suddenly fell silent recalling that Dijkstra was in no way suitable as a defence witness in the case; and neither were references to the mages of Thanedd likely to improve the situation to any great degree.
What utter nonsense it is he continued loudly and quickly to accuse Geralt of kidnapping Ciri in Cintra! Geralt found the girl when she was wandering around in Riverdell after the city had been sacked and hid her not from you but from the Nilfgaardian agents who were pursuing her! I myself was captured by those agents and submitted to torture so that I would betray where Ciri was concealed! But I didnt breathe a word and those agents are now six feet under. They didnt know who they were up against!
Your valour the count interrupted was in vain however. Emhyr finally has Cirilla. As we are all aware he means to marry her and make her Imperatrice of Nilfgaard. For the moment he has proclaimed her Queen of Cintra and the surrounding lands causing us some problems by so doing.
Emhyr the poet declared could place whoever he wanted on the Cintran throne. Ciri whichever way you look at it has a right to the throne.
A right? Vissegerd bellowed spraying Geralt with spittle. What fucking right? Emhyr may marry her; that is his choice. He may give her and the children he sires with her endowments and titles according to his whims and fancies. Queen of Cintra and the Skellige Islands? Duchess of Brugge? Countess Palatine of Sodden? By all means. Let us all bow down! And why not I humbly ask why not the Queen of the Sun and the Suzerain of the Moon? That accursed tainted blood has no right to the throne! The entire female line of that family is accursed all rotten vipers beginning with Riannon! Like Cirillas great-grandmother Adalia who lay with her own cousin; like her great-great-grandmother Muriel the Impure who debased herself with everyone! Incestuous bastards and mongrels emerge from that family on the distaff side one after the other!
Speak more softly My Lord Marshal Dandelion advised haughtily. The standard with the golden lions flutters before your tent and you are prepared at any moment to proclaim Ciris grandmother Calanthe the Lioness of Cintra in whose name the majority of your soldiers shed blood at the Battles of Marnadal and Sodden a bastard. I would not be sure of the loyalty of your army were you to do so.
Vissegerd covered the distance separating him from Dandelion in two paces seized the poet by the ruff and lifted him up from his chair. The marshals face which a moment before had only been flecked with red spots now assumed the colour of deep heraldic red. Geralt was just beginning to seriously worry about his friend when luckily an aide-de-camp burst into the tent informing the marshal in an excited voice about urgent and important news brought by the scouts. Vissegerd shoved Dandelion back down onto the stool and exited.
Phew… the poet snuffled twisting his head and neck around. Much more of that and hed have throttled me… Could you loosen my bonds somewhat My Lord?
No Master Dandelion. I cannot.
Do you give credence to this balderdash? That we are spies?
My credence is neither here nor there. You will remain bound.
Very well Dandelion said clearing his throat. Whats got into your marshal? Why did he suddenly assault me like a falcon swooping on a woodcock?
Daniel Etcheverry smiled wryly.
When you alluded to the soldiers loyalty you unwittingly rubbed salt in the wound Master Poet.
What do you mean? What wound?
These soldiers sincerely lamented Cirillas passing when news of her death reached them. And then new information got out. It turned out that Calanthes granddaughter was alive. That she was in Nilfgaard in the good graces of Imperator Emhyr. Which led to mass desertion. Bear in mind that these men left their homes and families and fled to Sodden and Brugge and to Temeria because they wanted to fight for Cintra for Calanthes blood. They wanted to liberate their country to drive the invader from Cintra so that Calanthes descendant would regain the throne. And what has happened? Calanthes blood is returning to the Cintran throne in triumph and glory…
As a puppet in the hands of Emhyr who kidnapped her.
Emhyr will marry her. He wants to place her beside him on the imperial throne and validate her titles and fiefs. Is that how puppets are treated? Cirilla was seen at the imperial court by envoys from Kovir. They maintain that she did not give the impression of someone who had been kidnapped. Cirilla the only heiress to Cintras throne is returning to that throne as an ally of Nilfgaard. That is the news that has spread among the soldiery.
Circulated by Nilfgaardian agents.
Im aware of that. The count nodded. But the soldiers arent. When we catch deserters we stretch their necks but I understand them a little. Theyre Cintrans. They want to fight for their own–not Temerian–homes. Under their own banner. Under their own command not the command of Temeria. They see that here in this army their golden lions have to bow the knee before the Temerian lilies. Vissegerd had eight thousand men of which five thousand were native Cintrans; the rest consisted of Temerian reserve units and volunteer chivalry from Brugge and Sodden. At this moment the corps numbers six thousand. And all the deserters have been from Cintra. Vissegerds army has been decimated even before the battle has begun. Do you understand what that means for him?
A serious loss of face. And maybe position.
Precisely. Should another few hundred desert King Foltest will deprive him of his baton. Right now its hard to call this corps Cintran. Vissegerd is vacillating wanting to put an end to the defection which is why hes spreading rumours about the doubtful–but most certainly unlawful–descent of Cirilla and her ancestors.
Which you Geralt said unable to stop himself listen to with evident distaste My Lord.
Have you noticed? Daniel Etcheverry said smiling faintly. Why Vissegerd doesnt know my lineage… In short Im related to this Cirilla. Muriel Countess of Garramone known as the Beautiful Impure Cirillas great-great-grandmother was also my great-great-grandmother. Legends about her love affairs circulate in the family to this day. However I listen with distaste as Vissegerd imputes incestuous tendencies and promiscuity to my ancestor. But I do not react. Because Im a soldier. Do you understand me sufficiently gentlemen?
Yes Geralt said.
No Dandelion said.
Vissegerd is the commander of this corps which forms part of the Temerian Army. And Cirilla in Emhyrs hands is a threat to the corps and thus to the army not to mention my king and my country. I have no intention of refuting the rumours being circulated about Cirilla by Vissegerd nor of challenging my commanding officers authority. I even intend to support him in proving that Cirilla is a bastard with no rights to the throne. Not only will I not challenge the marshal–not only will I not question his decisions or orders–I shall actually support them. And execute them when necessary.
The Witchers mouth contorted into a smile.
I think you understand now dont you Dandelion? Not for a moment did the count consider us spies or he would not have given us such a thorough explanation. The count knows were innocent. But he will not lift a finger when Vissegerd sentences us.
You mean… You mean were…
The count looked away.
Vissegerd he said softly is furious. You were unlucky to fall into his hands. Particularly you Master Witcher. As for Master Dandelion I shall try to…
He was interrupted by the return of Vissegerd still red-faced and panting like a bull. The marshal walked over to the table slammed his mace onto the maps spread over it then turned towards Geralt and bored his eyes into him. The Witcher did not avert his gaze.
The wounded Nilfgaardian the scouts captured Vissegerd drawled managed to tear his dressing off and bled to death on the way. He preferred to die rather than contribute to the defeat and death of his countrymen. We wanted to use him but he escaped slipped through our fingers leaving nothing on them but blood. Hed been well schooled. Its a pity that witchers dont instil such customs in royal children when they take them to be raised.
Geralt remained silent but still did not lower his eyes.
Well you monster. You freak of nature. You hell spawn. What did you teach Cirilla after kidnapping her? How did you bring her up? Everyone can see how! That snake-in-the-grass is alive and is lounging on the Nilfgaardian throne as if it were nothing! And when Emhyr takes her to his bed shes sure to spread her legs willingly as if it were nothing too the slut!
Your anger is getting the better of you Dandelion mumbled. Is it chivalrous marshal to blame a child for everything? A child that Emhyr took by force?
There are also ways against force! Chivalrous ones noble ones! Were she really of royal blood she would have found a way! She would have found a knife! A pair of scissors a piece of broken glass. Why even a bodkin! The bitch could have torn open the veins in her wrists with her own teeth! Or hanged herself with her own stockings!
I dont want to listen to you any longer marshal Geralt said softly. I dont want to listen to you any longer.
Vissegerd ground his teeth audibly and leant over.
You dont want to he said in a voice trembling with fury. That is fortunate because I dont have anything more to say to you. Apart from one thing. Back then in Cintra fifteen years ago a great deal was said about destiny. At the time I thought it was nonsense. But it turned out to be your destiny Witcher. Ever since that night your fate has been sealed written in black runes among the stars. Ciri daughter of Pavetta is your destiny. And your death. Because of Ciri daughter of Pavetta you shall hang.
The Brigade joined Operation Centaur as a unit assigned to the 4th Horse Cavalry. We received reinforcements in the form of three squads of Verdenian light horse which I assigned to the Vreemde Battle Group. Following the example of the campaign in Aedirn I created two more battle groups from the rest of the brigade naming them Sievers and Morteisen each comprising four squadrons.
We set out from the concentration area near Drieschot on the night of the fourth of August. The Groups orders ran:
Capture the Vidort-Carcano-Armeria territory; seize the crossing over the Ina; destroy any hostile troops encountered but avoid significant points of resistance. Start fires particularly at night to light the way for the 4th Horse Cavalry. Induce panic among civilians and use their flight to block all of the arterial routes to the enemys rear. Feign encirclement to drive the retreating enemy forces towards the actual encirclements. Carry out the elimination of selected groups of the civilian population and prisoners of war to cause terror intensify panic and undermine the enemys morale.
The Brigade carried out the above mission with great soldierly devotion.
Elan Trahe
For Imperator and Fatherland. The glorious trail of fire of the 7th Daerlanian Cavalry Brigade
CHAPTER FIVE
Milva did not have time to reach the horses and save them. She was a witness to their theft but a helpless one. First she was swept along by the frantic panic-stricken crowd then the road was obstructed by careering wagons and finally she became stuck in a woolly bleating flock of sheep through which she had to force her way as though it were a snowdrift. Later by the Chotla only a leap into the tall rushes growing in the marshes by the bank saved her from the Nilfgaardians swords as they ruthlessly cut down the fugitives crowded by the river showing no mercy either to women or children. Milva jumped into the water and reached the other bank partly wading and partly swimming on her back among the corpses being carried by the current.
And she took up the hunt. She remembered the direction in which the peasants who had stolen Roach Pegasus the chestnut colt and her own black had fled. And her priceless bow was still attached to her saddle. Tough luck she thought feet squelching in her wet boots as she ran the others will have to cope without me for now. I must get my damn bow and horse back!
She freed Pegasus first. The poets horse was ignoring the heels digging into his sides. He was paying no heed to the urgent shouts of the inexperienced rider and had no intention of galloping; instead he trotted slowly through the birch wood. The poor fellow was being left a long way behind the other horse thieves. When he heard and then saw Milva over his shoulder he jumped off without a second thought and bolted into the undergrowth holding up his britches with both hands. Milva did not pursue him overcoming her seething desire to exact some serious revenge. She leapt into the saddle in full flight landing heavily and making the strings of the lute fastened to the saddlebags twang. A skilled horsewoman she managed to force the gelding to gallop. Or rather to the lumbering canter that Pegasus considered a gallop.
But even this pseudo-gallop was enough for the horse thieves escape had been slowed by another tricky mount. The Witchers skittish Roach the infuriating sulky bay mare Geralt had so often sworn hed exchange for another steed whether it be an ass a mule or even a billy goat. Milva caught up with the thieves just as Roach irritated by a clumsy tug of the reins had thrown her rider to the ground. The rest of the peasants had dismounted and were trying to get the frisky and excitable mare under control. They were so busy they only noticed Milva when she rode among them on Pegasus and kicked one of them in the face breaking his nose. When he fell to the ground howling and calling upon the Gods she recognised him. It was Cloggy. A peasant who clearly had no luck in his dealings with people. Or more particularly with Milva.
Unfortunately luck deserted Milva too. To be precise it wasnt her luck that was to blame more her own conceit and her conviction–based on shaky practical evidence–that she could beat up any brace of peasants she happened to meet in whatever manner she chose. When she dismounted she was punched in the eye and found herself on the ground. She drew her knife ready to spill some guts but was hit over the head with a stout stick so hard that it broke blinding her with bark and rotten wood. Stunned and blinded she still managed to grab the knee of the peasant beating her with the remains of the stick when he unexpectedly howled and keeled over. The other yelled too bringing both hands up to protect his head. Milva rubbed her eyes and saw that he was protecting himself from a rain of blows from a knout dealt by a man riding a grey horse. She sprang up dealing a powerful kick to the neck of the prostrate peasant. The rustler wheezed and flailed his legs leaving his loins unprotected. Milva took advantage of that at once channelling all her anger into a well-aimed kick. The peasant curled up in a ball clamped his hands on his crotch and howled so loudly leaves fell from the birch trees.
Meanwhile the horseman on the grey was busy with Cloggy whose nose was streaming blood and with the other peasant–he chased them away into the trees with blows from the knout. He returned in order to thrash the one on the ground but reined in his horse; Milva had managed to catch her black and was holding her bow with an arrow already nocked. The bowstring was only pulled halfway back but the arrowhead was pointing directly at the horsemans chest.
For a moment they looked at each other: the horseman and the young woman. Then with a slow movement he pulled an arrow with long fletchings from his belt and threw it down at Milvas feet.
I knew Id have the chance to give you back your arrow elf he said calmly.
Im not an elf Nilfgaardian.
And Im not a Nilfgaardian. Put that bow down will you? If I wished you ill I could have just stood by and watched those peasants kick you around.
The devil only knows she said through her teeth who you are and what you wish for me. But thanks for saving me. And for my arrow. And for dealing with that good-for-nothing I didnt hit properly the other day.
The roughed-up horse thief still curled up in a ball choked back his sobs his face buried in the leaf litter. The horseman didnt even look at him. He looked at Milva.
Catch the horses he said. We have to get away from the river and fast too; the armys combing the forests on both banks.
We have to? she said grimacing and lowering her bow. Together? Since when were we comrades? Or a company?
Ill explain he said steering his horse and grabbing the chestnuts reins if you give me time.
The point is I dont have any time. The Witcher and the others—
I know. But we wont save them by letting ourselves get killed or captured. Catch the horses and well flee into the forest. Hurry!
His names Cahir Milva recalled glancing at her companion with whom she was now sitting in the pit left by a fallen tree. A strange Nilfgaardian who says he isnt a Nilfgaardian. Cahir.
We thought theyd killed you she muttered. The riderless chestnut came running past us…
I had a minor adventure he answered drily with three brigands as shaggy as werewolves. They ambushed me. The horse got away. The brigands didnt but then they were on foot. Before I managed to get a new mount Id fallen far behind you. I only managed to catch up with you this morning. Right by the camp. I crossed the river down in the gully and waited on the far bank. I knew youd head east.
One of the horses concealed in the alder wood snorted and stamped its hooves. Dusk was falling. Mosquitoes whined annoyingly around their ears.
Its quiet in the forest Cahir said. The armies have gone the battle is over.
The slaughters over you mean.
Our cavalry… he stammered and cleared his throat. The imperial cavalry attacked the camp and then troops appeared from the south. I think it was the Temerian Army.
If the battles over we should go back. We should search for the Witcher Dandelion and the others.
It would be better to wait until nightfall.
Theres something horrible about this place she said softly tightening her grip on the bow. Its such a bleak wilderness. It gives me the shivers. Apparently quiet but theres always something rustling in the bushes… The Witcher said ghouls are attracted to battlefields… And the peasants were telling stories about a vampire…
You arent alone he replied under his breath. Its much more frightening when youre alone.
Indeed. She nodded empathising with him. After all youve been following us for almost a fortnight all alone. Youve been trudging after us while surrounded by your people—You might say youre not a Nilfgaardian but theyre still yours arent they. Devil take me if I understand it; instead of going back to your own youre tracking the Witcher. Why?
Its a long story.
When the tall Scoiatael leant over him Struycken who was bound to a pole blinked in fear. It was said there was no such thing as an ugly elf that every single one of them was comely that they were born beautiful. And perhaps the legendary commander of the Squirrels had been born beautiful. But now that his face was gashed by a hideous diagonal scar deforming his forehead eyebrow nose and cheek nothing remained of his elven good looks.
The elf with the disfigured physiognomy sat down on a fallen tree trunk.
I am Isengrim Faoiltiarna he said leaning over the captive once again. Ive been fighting humans for four years and leading a commando for three. I have buried my brother who fell in combat four cousins and more than four hundred brothers in arms. In my struggle I treat your imperator as my ally as I have proved several times by passing intelligence to your spies helping your agents and eliminating individuals selected by you.
Faoiltiarna fell silent and made a sign with his gloved hand. The Scoiatael standing alongside picked up a small birchbark canteen. The canteen gave off a sweet aroma.
I considered and consider Nilfgaard an ally the elf with the scar repeated which is why I did not initially believe my informant when he warned that a trap was being laid for me. That I would receive instructions for a private meeting with a Nilfgaardian emissary and that I would be captured then. I didnt believe but being cautious by nature I turned up for the rendezvous a little earlier than expected and not alone. Much to my surprise and dismay instead of the said emissary there were six thugs waiting with a fishing net ropes a leather mask with a gag and a straitjacket fastened with straps and buckles. Standard equipment used by your secret service during abductions I would say. Nilfgaard wanted to capture me Faoiltiarna alive and transport me somewhere gagged and securely fastened in a straitjacket. A curious affair I would say. And one requiring some elucidation. Im delighted that I managed to take alive at least one of the thugs who had been set on me–no doubt their leader–who will be able to furnish me with that elucidation.
Struycken gritted his teeth and turned his head away in order not to look at the elfs disfigured face. He preferred to look at the birchbark canteen and the two wasps buzzing around it.
And now Faoiltiarna continued wiping his sweaty neck with a scarf lets have a little chat Master Kidnapper. To make the conversation flow let me clarify a few points. There is maple syrup in the canteen. Should our little chat not proceed in a spirit of mutual understanding and complete frankness we shall copiously anoint your head with the aforementioned syrup paying very close attention to your eyes and ears. Then we shall place you on an anthill this one here to be precise over which these charming hardworking insects are scurrying. Let me add that this method has already proved its worth in the case of several Dhoine and angivare who evinced great stubbornness and a lack of candour.
I am in the imperial service! the spy screamed blanching. I am an officer of the imperial military intelligence a subordinate of Lord Vattier de Rideaux Viscount of Eiddon! My name is Jan Struycken! I protest—
What awful luck the elf interrupted him that these red ants greedy for maple syrup have never heard of the viscount. Let us begin. I shall not ask who gave the order for my abduction because it is obvious. So my first question shall be: where was I to be taken?
The Nilfgaardian spy struggled against the ropes and jerked his head for it seemed to him the ants were already crawling over his cheeks. But he remained silent.
Too bad Faoiltiarna said breaking the silence and gesturing to the elf with the canteen. Apply the syrup.
I was to transport you to Nastrog Castle in Verden! Struycken yelled. On the orders of Viscount de Rideaux!
Thank you. And what awaited me there?
An interrogation…
What was I to be asked about?
About the events on Thanedd! Untie me I beg you! Ill tell you everything!
Of course you will the elf sighed stretching. Particularly since weve already made a start and in matters like these thats usually the most difficult part. Continue.
I was ordered to make you confess where Vilgefortz and Rience are hiding! And Cahir Mawr Dyffryn son of Ceallach!
How comical. A trap laid to ask me about Vilgefortz and Rience? Whatever would I know about them? What could link me with them? And Cahir? Thats even more comical. I sent him to you did I not? Just as you requested. In fetters. Are you saying the package didnt arrive?
The unit which was sent to the designated rendezvous point was slaughtered… Cahir was not among the dead…
Ah. And Lord Vattier de Rideaux became suspicious? But instead of sending another emissary to the commando and asking for an explanation he immediately laid a trap for me. And ordered me dragged to Nastrog in chains and interrogated about the incidents on Thanedd.
The spy said nothing.
Didnt you get it? the elf said and bent his head bringing his hideous face towards Struycken. That was a question. And it ran: whats this all about?
I dont know… I dont know I swear…
Faoiltiarna beckoned with a hand and pointed. Struycken howled thrashed around swore on the Great Sun pleaded his innocence wept tossed his head about and spat out the syrup which had been thickly smeared over his face. Only when he was carried over to the anthill by four Scoiatael did he decide to talk–although the consequences of speaking were potentially more dreadful than the ants.
Sire… Should anyone find out about this Im dead meat… But I shall disclose it to you… Ive seen confidential orders. Ive eavesdropped… Ill tell you everything…
Of course you will. The elf nodded. The record on the anthill is an hour and forty minutes and belongs to a certain officer from King Demavends special forces. But even he talked in the end. Very well begin. Quickly coherently and to the point.
The Imperator is certain he was betrayed on Thanedd. The traitor is Vilgefortz of Roggeveen a sorcerer and his assistant Rience. But mostly Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach. Vattier… Viscount Vattier is not certain whether you Scoiatael also had a hand in the treachery if only unwittingly… Which is why he ordered you to be seized and delivered in secret to Nastrog Castle… Lord Faoiltiarna Ive been working in the secret service for twenty years… Vattier de Rideaux is my third boss…
More coherently please. And stop shaking. If youre frank with me youll still be able to serve a few more bosses.
Although it was kept absolutely confidential I knew… I knew who Vilgefortz and Cahir were supposed to capture on the island. And it looked like they had succeeded. Because they brought that… you know… that princess from Cintra to Loc Grim. I thought theyd pulled it off and that Cahir and Rience would become barons and that sorcerer a count at least… But instead the Imperator summoned Tawny Owl–I mean Lord Skellen–and ordered him and Lord Vattier to capture Cahir… And Rience and Vilgefortz… Anyone who might know anything about Thanedd and that incident was to be tortured… Including you… It didnt take much to guess you know that it was treachery. That a sham princess had been brought to Loc Grim…
The spy struggled to breathe nervously gasping for air through lips covered with maple syrup.
Untie him Faoiltiarna ordered his Squirrels. And let him wash his face.
The order was carried out immediately. A moment later the mastermind of the unsuccessful ambush was standing with head lowered before the legendary Scoiatael commander. Faoiltiarna looked at him indifferently.
Scrape the syrup thoroughly from your ears he finally said. Then prick them up and listen carefully as befits a spy with many years experience. I shall give you proof of my loyalty to the Imperator. I shall give you a thorough account of the matters that interest him. And you will repeat everything word for word to Vattier de Rideaux.
The spy nodded eagerly.
In the middle of Blathe which according to your reckoning is the beginning of June the elf began I was contacted by Enid an Gleanna the sorceress also known as Francesca Findabair. Soon after on her orders a certain Rience came to my commando. He was said to be the factotum of Vilgefortz of Roggeveen also a sorcerer. A plan of action was drawn up in utter secrecy with the aim of eliminating a number of mages during the conclave on the Isle of Thanedd. The plan was presented as one having the full support of Imperator Emhyr Vattier de Rideaux and Stephan Skellen; otherwise I should not have agreed to collaborate with Dhoine–sorcerers or not–for I have seen too many entrapments in my life. The involvement of the Empire was confirmed by the arrival of a ship at Cape Bremervoord. On board was Cahir son of Ceallach equipped with special authorisation and orders. According to those orders I selected a special squad from the commando which would be answerable only to Cahir. I was aware that they were trusted to capture and remove a… certain individual… from the island.
We sailed to Thanedd Faoiltiarna began again after a pause on the ship which had brought Cahir. Rience had some amulets and he used them to surround the ship with a magical fog. We sailed into the caverns beneath the island. From there we proceeded to the catacombs under Garstang. There we realised at once that something wasnt right. Rience had received some telepathic signals from Vilgefortz. We knew wed have to start fighting any minute. Fortunately we were ready because the moment we left the catacombs we were plunged into hell.
The elf contorted his mutilated face as though the recollection pained him.
After our initial successes matters became complicated. We were unable to eliminate all the royal sorcerers and we took heavy casualties. Several mages who were party to the conspiracy also perished while others began to save their skins and teleport away. All of a sudden Vilgefortz vanished then Rience and Enid an Gleanna soon followed suit. I treated that final disappearance as the conclusive signal for our withdrawal. I did not however give the order but waited for the return of Cahir and his squad who had set off at once to carry out their mission. When they did not return we began to search for them.
No one Faoiltiarna said looking the Nilfgaardian spy in the eyes survived from that squad; they were all brutally slaughtered. We found Cahir on the steps leading to Tor Lara a tower which exploded during the battle and ended up as a heap of rubble. He was wounded and unconscious; it was clear he had not accomplished the mission he had been assigned. There was no sign of his target anywhere and royal troops were already pouring out of Aretuza and Loxia. I knew there was no way Cahir could fall into their hands because it would have been proof of Nilfgaards active involvement in the operation. So we took him with us and fled back to the catacombs and then the caverns. We boarded the ship and sailed away. Twelve remained of my commando most of them wounded.
The wind was at our backs. We landed to the west of Hirundum and hid in the forest. Cahir was trying to tear off his bandages and was yelling something about an insane girl with green eyes about the Lion Cub of Cintra about a witcher who had massacred his men about the Tower of Gulls and a mage who flew like a bird. He demanded a horse and ordered us to return him to the island citing the imperial orders which under the circumstances I had to treat as the ravings of a madman. As we knew war was already raging in Aedirn so I considered it more important to swiftly rebuild my depleted commando and resume the fight against the Dhoine.
Cahir was still with us when I found your secret order in a dead drop. I was astonished. Although Cahir had clearly not completed his mission there was nothing to suggest he was guilty of treachery. But I did not ponder over it for long judging that it was your business and that you ought to clear it up. Cahir put up no resistance to being tied up he was calm and resigned. I ordered him to be placed in a coffin and with the help of a hawker acquaintance delivered to the location designated in the letter. I was not I admit inclined to further deplete my commando by providing an escort. I dont know who murdered your men at the rendezvous point. But only I knew where it was. So if this version of the totally random extermination of your unit doesnt suit you search for traitors among your own because only you and I knew the time and place.
Faoiltiarna stood up.
That is all. All the information I have given here is true. I would not supply you with anything more in the dungeons of Nastrog. The lies and confabulations with which I might try to satisfy the investigating officer and his torturers would actually do more harm than good. I do not know anything more. In particular I dont know Vilgefortz and Riences whereabouts and neither do I know if your suspicions of betrayal are justified. I also emphatically declare that I know nothing about the princess from Cintra the genuine or the sham one. I have told you everything I know. I trust that neither Lord de Rideaux nor Stephan Skellen will want to set any more traps for me. The Dhoine have been trying to capture and kill me for a long long time so I have adopted the custom of ruthless extermination of all trap setters. I shall not in the future investigate to check if one of the trap setters is by chance a subordinate of Vattier or Skellen. I do not have the time nor the desire to make such an investigation. Do I make myself clear?
Struycken nodded and swallowed.
Now take a horse spy and get the hell out of my forest.
You mean they were delivering you to the gallows? Milva mumbled. Now I understand some of it but not everything. Why instead of holing up somewhere are you following the Witcher? Hes really got it in for you… And hes spared your life twice…
Three times.
I saw two of them. Though you werent the one who beat the shit out of the Witcher on Thanedd as I first thought I dont think you ought to get in the way of his sword again. Theres a lot about your feud I dont understand but you saved me and youve got an honest face… So Ill tell you Cahir bluntly: when the Witcher talks about the men who took his Ciri to Nilfgaard he grinds his teeth until sparks fly. And if you spat on him he would steam.
Ciri he repeated. Sounds nice.
Didnt you know?
No. My people always called her Cirilla or the Lion Cub of Cintra… And when she was with me–for she was once… she didnt say a single word. Even though I saved her life.
Only the devil himself could grasp all this Milva said exasperated. Your fates are all entangled Cahir knotted and mixed up. Its too much for my head.
And whats your name? he suddenly asked.
Milva… Maria Barring. But call me Milva.
The Witchers heading the wrong way Milva he offered a moment later. Ciri isnt in Nilfgaard. The kidnappers didnt take her to Nilfgaard. If it was a kidnap at all.
What do you mean?
Its a long story.
By the Great Sun Fringilla said standing in the doorway tilting her head and looking in astonishment at her friend. What have you done to your hair Assire?
I washed it Assire var Anahid replied coldly. And styled it. Come in and sit down. Get out of that chair Merlin. Shoo!
The sorceress sat down in the chair the black cat had reluctantly vacated her eyes still fixed on her friends coiffure.
Stop staring Assire said touching her bouffant and glistening curls. I decided to make a few changes. Why I just took your lead.
I was always taken as an oddball and a rebel Fringilla Vigo chuckled. But when they see you in the academy or at court…
Im seldom at court Assire cut her off and the academy will have to get used to it. This is the thirteenth century. Its high time we challenged the superstition that dressing up is proof of an enchantresss flightiness and the superficiality of her mind.
Fingernails too Fringilla said slightly narrowing her green eyes which never ever missed anything. Whatever next darling? I hardly recognise you.
A simple spell the enchantress replied coolly ought to be enough to prove its me and no doppelgänger. Cast the spell if you must. And then lets move on to the matter in hand. I asked something of you…
Fringilla Vigo stroked the cat which was rubbing himself against her calf purring and arching his back pretending it was a gesture of friendship and not a veiled hint that the black-haired sorceress should get up from the armchair.
The same thing Seneschal Ceallach aep Gruffyd asked of you she said without raising her head.
Indeed Assire confirmed in hushed tones Ceallach visited me distraught and asked me to intercede to save his son. Emhyr has ordered him to be captured tortured and executed. Who else could he turn to except a relative? Mawr Ceallachs wife and Cahirs mother is my niece my sisters youngest daughter. In spite of all that I didnt promise him anything. Because my hands are tied. Certain circumstances took place recently which do not permit me to draw attention to myself. I shall elucidate. But only after youve given me the information I asked you to gather.
Fringilla Vigo furtively sighed with relief. She had been afraid her friend would want to get involved in the case of Cahir son of Ceallach which had gallows written all over it. And equally afraid she would be asked for help she couldnt refuse.
Around the middle of July she began the entire court at Loc Grim had the opportunity to marvel at a fifteen-year-old girl supposedly the Princess of Cintra whom Emhyr insisted on referring to as Your Majesty during the audience and was treated so kindly there were even rumours of a quick marriage.
So I heard Assire said stroking the cat which had given up on Fringilla and was trying to occupy her own armchair instead. This doubtlessly political marriage is still talked about.
But more discreetly and not so often. For the Cintran was moved to Darn Rowan. Prisoners of state as you know are often kept in Darn Rowan. Potential imperatrices much less often.
Assire didnt comment. She waited patiently examining her freshly filed and varnished fingernails.
You must remember Fringilla Vigo continued how Emhyr summoned us all three years ago and ordered us to establish the whereabouts of a certain individual. Within the Northern Kingdoms. You must also recall how furious he became when we failed. Albrich–who explained it was impossible to detect anything from such a distance never mind bypassing protective screens–was severely reprimanded. But thats not all. A week after the aforementioned audience in Loc Grim when victory at Aldersberg was being celebrated Emhyr noticed myself and Albrich in the castle chamber. And graced us with his conversation. The gist of his speech only somewhat trivialising it was: Youre all of you leeches spongers and idlers. Your conjuring tricks cost me a fortune and theres nothing to show for it. The task which your entire lamentable academy failed to achieve was carried out in four days by an ordinary astrologist.
Assire var Anahid snorted disdainfully and continued to stroke the cat.
It was easy to discover Fringilla Vigo went on that the miracle worker was none other than the infamous astrologist Xarthisius.
I take it the subject of the search was the Cintran candidate for the position of Imperatrice. Xarthisius found her. And then what? Was he appointed Secretary of State? Head of the Department of Unfeasible Affairs?
No. He was thrown into a dungeon the following week.
I fear I fail to understand what this has to do with Cahir son of Ceallach.
Patience. Dont make me get ahead of myself. This is crucial.
I beg your pardon. Go on.
Do you remember what Emhyr gave us when we began our search three years ago?
A lock of hair.
Precisely Fringilla said reaching for a small leather purse. And this is it. A few blonde hairs belonging to a six-year-old girl. I kept the remnants. And its worth your knowing that Stella Congreve Countess of Liddertal is looking after the Cintran princess who is being kept in isolation in Darn Rowan. Stella happens to be indebted to me for various reasons so it was easy for me to come by a second lock of hair. And this is it. Somewhat darker but hair darkens with age. Nonetheless the locks belong to two totally different people. Ive examined them and there is no doubt in this respect.
I had expected a revelation of this kind Assire var Anahid admitted when I heard that the Cintran had been shut up in Darn Rowan. The astrologer either fouled up completely or is implicated in a conspiracy that planned to supply Emhyr with a bogus individual. A conspiracy which will cost Cahir aep Ceallach his head. Thank you Fringilla. Everything is clear.
Not everything the sorceress said and shook her head of black hair. First of all it wasnt Xarthisius who found the Cintran or took her to Loc Grim. The astrologist started on his horoscopes and astromancy after Emhyr realised he had a bogus princess and begun an intensive search for the real one. And the old fool ended up in the dungeon because of a simple mistake in his art or fraud. For he had established the whereabouts of the person Emhyr sought with a radial tolerance of approximately one hundred miles. And that region turned out to be a desert a savage wilderness somewhere beyond the Tir Tochair massif and the riverhead of the Velda. Stephan Skellen who was sent there found nothing but scorpions and vultures.
I wouldnt have expected much more from Xarthisius. But that wont affect Cahirs fate. Emhyr is quick-tempered but he never sentences anyone to torture or death just like that without evidence. Someone as you said yourself made sure the bogus princess was taken to Loc Grim in place of the real one. Someone came up with a double. So there was a conspiracy and Cahir became mixed up in it. Possibly unwittingly. Which means he was used.
If that was the case he would have been used until the goal was reached. He would personally have delivered the double to Emhyr. But Cahir has vanished without a trace. Why? His disappearance was sure to have aroused suspicions. Did he fear Emhyr would notice the deception at first glance? For he did. He couldnt fail to after all he had a—
A lock of hair Assire cut in. A lock of hair from a six-year-old girl. Fringilla Emhyr hasnt been hunting for that girl for three years but for much longer. It looks as though Cahir has become embroiled in something very nasty something which began when he was still riding a stick horse and pretending to be a knight. Mmm… Leave me those strands of hair. Id like to test them both thoroughly.
Fringilla Vigo nodded slowly and narrowed her green eyes.
I will. But be cautious Assire. Dont get mixed up in any dirty business because it might draw attention to you. And at the beginning of the conversation you hinted that attention would be inconvenient to you. And promised youd reveal why.
Assire var Anahid stood up walked over to the window and stared at the spires and pinnacles of Nilfgaard–the capital of the Empire called the City of the Golden Towers–shimmering in the setting sun.
You once told me and I remembered it she said without turning around that no borders should ever divide magic. That magic should have the highest values be above all divisions. That what was needed was some kind of… secret organisation… Something like a convent or a lodge…
I am ready said Fringilla Vigo Nilfgaardian sorceress breaking the short silence. My mind is made up and I am ready. Thank you for your trust and the distinction. When and where will this lodge meet my mysterious and enigmatic friend?
Assire var Anahid Nilfgaardian sorceress turned away. The hint of a smile played on her lips.
Soon she said. Ill explain everything to you soon. But first before I forget… Give me the address of your milliner Fringilla.
There isnt a single fire Milva whispered staring at the dark bank beyond the river gleaming in the moonlight or a living soul there I reckon. There were two hundred refugees in the camp. Has no one got off scot-free?
If the imperial troops won they took them all captive Cahir whispered back. If your boys got the upper hand they took the refugees with them when they moved on.
They neared the riverbank and the reeds covering the marsh. Milva trod on something and sprang back suppressing a scream at the sight of a stiff arm covered in leeches sticking out of the mud.
Its just a dead body Cahir muttered grabbing her hand. One of ours. A Daerlanian.
Who is he?
One of the Seventh Daerlanian Cavalry Brigade. See the silver scorpion on his sleeve…
By the Gods… The girl shuddered and gripped her bow tightly in her sweating fist. Did you hear that noise? What was it?
A wolf.
Or a ghoul… Or some other hell spawn. There must be a whole load of dead bodies in the camp… A pox on it Im not crossing that river at night!
Fine well wait until dawn… Milva? Whats that strange…?
Regis… the archer said stifling a shout at the scent of wormwood sage coriander and aniseed. Regis? Is that you?
Yes its me the barber-surgeon replied noiselessly emerging from the gloom I was worried about you. But youre not alone I see.
Aye. Milva released Cahirs arm noticing he had already drawn his sword. Im not alone and hes not alone any more. But thats a long story as some people would say. Regis what about the Witcher? And Dandelion? And the others? Do you know whats happened to them?
Indeed I do. Do you have horses?
Yes theyre hidden in the willows…
Then lets head southwards down the Chotla. Without delay. We must reach Armeria before midnight.
What about the Witcher and the poet? Are they alive?
Yes. But theyre in a bit of difficulty.
What kind of difficulty?
Its a long story.
Dandelion groaned trying to turn around and get into a slightly more comfortable position. It was however an impossible task for someone lying trussed up like a ham to be smoked in a pile of soft wood shavings and sawdust and.
They didnt hang us right away he grunted. Theres hope for us still. We arent done for yet…
Would you mind shutting up? the Witcher said lying back calmly and looking up at the moon visible through a hole in the roof of the woodshed. Do you know why Vissegerd didnt hang us right away? Because were to be executed publicly at dawn while the entire corps are mustered before moving out. For propaganda purposes.
Dandelion did not respond to that. Geralt only heard him panting with worry.
You still have a chance of dodging the drop he added trying to reassure the poet. Vissegerd simply wants to exact his own private revenge on me; he hasnt got anything against you. Your friend the count will get you out of trouble youll see.
Thats crap the bard replied to the Witchers astonishment calmly and quite reasonably. Crap crap crap. Dont treat me like a child. For one thing two hanged men are better for propaganda purposes than one. For another you dont let a witness to private revenge live. No brother theyll stretch us both.
Thats enough Dandelion. Lie there quietly and think up a plan.
What bloody plan?
Any bloody plan.
The poets idle chatter prevented the Witcher from gathering his thoughts and he had no time to waste. He expected that men from Temerian military intelligence–some of whom must have been present in Vissegerds corps–would burst into the woodshed at any moment. Intelligence officers would surely be interested in asking him about various aspects of the events in Garstang on the Isle of Thanedd. Geralt hardly knew any of the details but he was confident that he would be feeling very very poorly indeed before the agents accepted this. All his hopes depended on Vissegerd blinded by the lust for revenge not having made the Witchers capture public. Intelligence officers might want to free the captives from the clutches of the furious marshal in order to take them to headquarters. Or to be more precise take whatever was left of them after the first round of interrogation.
The poet meanwhile had come up with a plan.
Geralt! Lets pretend we know something important. That we really are spies or something like that. Then—
Dandelion please.
No? So we could try to bribe the sentries. I have some money hidden away. Doubloons sewn into the lining of my boot. For a rainy day… Well summon the sentries…
Wholl take all you have and then beat you up for good measure.
The poet grumbled but stopped talking. From the field they heard shouts the patter of hooves and–what was worse–the smell of army pea soup. At that moment Geralt would have given all the sterlets and truffles in the world for a bowl of it. The sentries standing outside the shed were talking lazily chuckling and from time to time hawking up and spitting. The sentries were professional soldiers which could be discerned by their remarkable ability to communicate using sentences constructed entirely of pronouns and coarse expletives.
Geralt?
What?
I wonder whats happened to Milva… And Zoltan and Percival and Regis… Did you see them?
No. We cant rule out their being hacked to death or trampled by horses during the skirmish. The camp was knee-deep in corpses.
I cant believe Dandelion declared resolutely and with a note of hope in his voice I cant believe that crafty buggers like Zoltan and Percival… Or Milva…
Stop deluding yourself. Even if they did survive they wont help us.
Why not?
For three reasons. Firstly they have their own problems. Secondly were lying tied up in a shed in the middle of a camp of several thousand soldiers.
And the third reason? You mentioned three.
Thirdly the Witcher replied in a tired voice the monthly quota on miracles was used up when the woman from Kernow found her missing husband.
Over there the barber-surgeon said indicating the small dots of campfires is Fort Armeria at present the camp of the Temerian Army concentrated at Mayena.
Are the Witcher and Dandelion being held prisoner there? Milva asked standing up in her stirrups. Ha then things are bad… There must be hordes of armed men and guards everywhere. Wont be easy sneaking in there.
You wont have to Regis responded dismounting from Pegasus. The gelding gave a long snort and pulled his head away clearly disgusted by the barber-surgeons herbal odour which made his nostrils tingle.
You wont have to sneak in he repeated. Ill take care of it. Youll be waiting with the horses where the rivers sparkling do you see? Beneath the brightest star in the Seven Goats. The Chotla flows into the Ina there. Once Ive got the Witcher out of trouble Ill point him in that direction. And thats where youll meet.
How arrogant is that? Cahir muttered to Milva when they came close to each other dismounting. Hell get them out of trouble by himself without anyones help. Did you hear that? Who is he?
In truth I dont know Milva muttered back. But when it comes to impossible tasks I believe him. Yesterday in front of my very eyes he got a red-hot horseshoe out of a fire with his bare hands…
Is he a sorcerer?
No Regis answered from behind Pegasus demonstrating his exceptionally sensitive hearing. But does it really matter who I am? After all I havent asked for your personal details.
I am Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach.
I thank you and am full of admiration. The barber-surgeons voice had a slight note of scorn. I heard almost no Nilfgaardian accent when you pronounced your Nilfgaardian surname.
Im not—
Enough! Milva cut him off. This isnt the time for arguing or hesitating. Regis the Witchers waiting to be rescued.
Not before midnight the barber-surgeon said coldly looking up at the moon. So we have some time to talk. Who is this person Milva?
That person the archer replied a little angry and standing up for Cahir rescued me from a tight spot. That person will tell the Witcher when he meets him that hes going in the wrong direction. Ciris not in Nilfgaard.
A revelation indeed the barber-surgeon said his voice softening. And its source Sir Cahir son of Ceallach?
Its a long story.
Dandelion had been silent for a long time when one of the sentries suddenly stopped talking in the middle of a curse and the other rasped or possibly groaned. Geralt knew there had been three on guard so he listened intently but the third didnt utter even the slightest sound.
The Witcher waited holding his breath but what came to his ears a moment later was not the creaking of the door to the woodshed being opened by their rescuers. Not in the least. He heard even soft choral snoring. The sentries were quite simply asleep on duty.
He breathed out swore silently and was just about to lose himself in thoughts about Yennefer when medallion around the Witchers neck suddenly vibrated and the air was filled with the scent of wormwood basil coriander sage aniseed and the devil only knew what else.
Regis? he whispered in disbelief ineffectually trying to lift his head from the wood shavings.
Regis Dandelion whispered back moving around and rustling. No one else reeks like that… Where are you? I cant see you—
Be quiet!
The medallion stopped vibrating Geralt heard the poets relieved sigh and immediately after the soft hiss of a blade cutting his ropes. A moment later Dandelion gave a moan of pain as his circulation returned but dutifully tried to suppress it by sticking his fist into his mouth.
Geralt the barber-surgeon said his vague wavering shadow materialising at the Witchers side and immediately began to cut his bonds. Youll have to get past the camp guard yourselves. Head towards the east and the brightest star in the Seven Goats. Straight to the Ina. Milvas waiting for you there with the horses.
Help me get up…
He stood first on one leg and then on the other biting his fist. Dandelions circulation was already back to normal. A moment later the Witcher was also ready for action.
How are we going to get out? the poet suddenly asked. The sentries at the door are snoring but they may…
No they wont Regis interrupted in a whisper. But be careful when you leave. Its a full moon and the fields lit by campfires. In spite of it being night the entire camp is bustling but perhaps thats a good thing. The corporals of the guard are bored of challenging the sentries. Out you go. Good luck.
What about you?
Dont worry about me. Dont wait for me and dont look back.
But—
Dandelion the Witcher hissed. Youve been told not to worry about him got it?
Out you go Regis repeated. Good luck. Until the next time Geralt.
The Witcher turned around.
Thank you for rescuing us he said. But it would be best if we never met again. Am I making myself clear?
Absolutely. Dont waste time.
The sentries were sleeping as they had fallen snoring and smacking their lips. Not one of them even twitched when Geralt and Dandelion squeezed out through the slightly open door. Neither did any of them react when the Witcher unceremoniously pulled the thick homespun capes from two of them.
Thats no ordinary sleep Dandelion whispered.
Of course it isnt Geralt said. Hidden in the dark of the woodsheds shadow he looked around.
I see. The poet sighed. Is Regis a sorcerer?
No. No not a sorcerer.
He took that horseshoe from the fire. Put the sentries to sleep…
Stop wittering and concentrate. We arent free yet. Wrap that cape around you and lets cross the field. If anyone stops us were pretending to be soldiers.
Right. If anything happens Ill say—
Were pretending to be stupid soldiers. Lets go.
They crossed the field keeping their distance from the soldiers crowded around glowing braziers and campfires. Soldiers were roaming about here and there; two more werent conspicuous. They didnt arouse anyones suspicions; no one questioned them or stopped them. They passed beyond the stockade quickly and without any difficulty.
Everything went smoothly; in fact too smoothly. Geralt became anxious since he instinctively sensed danger and his anxiety was growing–rather than diminishing–the further they moved from the centre of the camp. He repeated to himself that there was nothing strange in that: they hadnt drawn attention to themselves in the middle of a military camp that was busy even at night and the only danger had been that of the alarm being raised should someone notice the sleeping sentries at the door to the woodshed. Now however they were approaching the perimeter where the sentries had–by necessity–to be vigilant. The fact that they were heading away from the centre of the camp could not be helping them. The Witcher recalled the plague of desertion in Vissegerds corps and was certain the guards had orders to watch carefully for anyone trying to abandon the camp.
The moon was shining brightly enough for Dandelion not to have to grope his way. This amount of light meant the Witcher could see as well as during the day which enabled them to avoid two sentry posts and wait in the bushes for a mounted patrol to pass. There was an alder grove directly in front of them apparently outside the ring of sentry posts. Everything was still going smoothly. Too smoothly.
Their ignorance of military customs proved to be their undoing.
They were tempted by the low dark clump of alders because of the cover it offered. But since time immemorial there have always been soldiers who lie in the bushes when it is their turn to be on guard duty while the ones who arent asleep keep an eye both on the enemy and on their own bloody-minded officers should any of the latter descend on them with an unexpected inspection.
Geralt and Dandelion had barely reached the alder grove before several dark shapes–and spear blades–loomed up in front of them.
Password?
Cintra! Dandelion blurted out without hesitation.
The soldiers chuckled as one.
Really boys one of them said is that the best you can do? If only someone would come up with something original. But no nothing but Cintra. Missing home are we? Well the fees the same as yesterday.
Dandelion audibly ground his teeth. Geralt weighed up the situation and their chances. His assessment: decidedly crap.
Come on the soldier said hurrying them. If you want to get through pay up and well turn a blind eye. And quickly because the corporal of the guard will be here any second.
 Owd on the poet said changing his accent and mode of speech. Ill just sit down and get me boot off because theres…
He didnt manage to say anything else. Four soldiers threw him to the ground. Then two of them each one seizing one of his legs between theirs pulled off his boots. The one whod asked for the password tore the lining from the inside of a bootleg. Something scattered around with a jingle.
Gold! the leader yelled. Pull the boots off the other one! And summon the corporal!
However there was no one to do any boot-pulling or summoning because half the guard dropped on their knees to search for the doubloons scattered among the leaves while the other half immediately began fighting furiously over Dandelions second boot. Its now or never Geralt thought punching the leader in the jaw and then kicking him in the side of his head as he fell. The soldiers who were searching for gold didnt even notice. Dandelion needed no encouragement to spring up and dash through the bushes his footwraps flapping. Geralt ran after him.
Help! Help! the leader of the watch bellowed from the ground his voice soon after joined by his comrades. Cooorporaaal!
You swine! Dandelion yelled back as he fled. Knaves! You stole my money!
Save your breath dolt! See that forest? Make for it.
Stop them! Stop theeem!
They ran. Geralt swore furiously hearing shouts whistles neighing and the thudding of hooves. Behind them. And in front of them. His astonishment didnt last long; one careful look was enough. What he had taken for a forest and a safe haven was an approaching wall of cavalry surging towards them like a wave.
Stop Dandelion! he shouted then turned back to the patrol galloping in their direction and whistled piercingly through his fingers.
Nilfgaard! he yelled at the top of his voice. Nilfgaard are coming! Back to the camp! Get back to the camp you fools! Sound the alarm! Nilfgaard!
The leading rider of the patrol pursuing them reined his horse to a rapid stop looked towards where Geralt had pointed screamed in terror and was about to turn back. But Geralt decided he had already done enough for the Cintran lions and Temerian lilies. He leapt at the soldier and dragged him from the saddle with a dextrous tug.
Jump on Dandelion! And hold tight!
The poet didnt need to be told twice. The horse sagged a little under the weight of an extra rider but spurred on by two pairs of heels was soon galloping hard. The approaching swarm of Nilfgaardians now represented a much greater threat than Vissegerd and his corps so they galloped along the ring of sentry posts trying to escape from the area where the two armies would clash at any moment. The Nilfgaardians were close however and had seen them. Dandelion yelled then Geralt looked around and saw the dark wall of Nilfgaardian troops beginning to extend black tentacles of pursuit. Without hesitating he steered the horse towards the camp overtaking the fleeing guards. Dandelion yelled once again but this time there was no need. The Witcher could also see the cavalry charging at them from the camp. Having been alerted Vissegerds corps had mounted at admirable speed. And Geralt and Dandelion were caught in a trap.
There was no way out. The Witcher changed the direction of their flight once more and urged from the horse all the speed it could muster trying to slip out of the dangerously narrowing gap between hammer and anvil. When hope dawned that they might just make it the night air suddenly sang with a whistle of fletchings. Dandelion yelled this time very loudly indeed and dug his fingers into Geralts sides. The Witcher felt something warm dripping onto his neck.
Hold on! he shouted catching the poet by his elbow and drawing him closer to his own back. Hold on Dandelion!
Theyve killed me! the poet howled impressively loudly for a dead man. Im bleeding! Im dying!
Hold on!
The hail of arrows and quarrels which was raining down on both armies and had proved to be so disastrous for Dandelion was also their salvation. The armies under fire seethed and lost momentum and the gap between the front lines which had been about to draw together remained open just long enough for the heavily snorting horse to whisk the two riders out of the trap. Geralt mercilessly forced his steed to ride hard for although the trees and safety were looming up in front of them hooves continued to thunder behind them. The horse grunted and stumbled but did not stop and they might have escaped had not Dandelion suddenly groaned and lurched backwards dragging the Witcher out of the saddle with him. Geralt unintentionally tugged on the reins the horse reared and the two men tumbled to the ground among some very low pines. The poet thudded onto the dirt and lay still groaning pathetically. His head and left shoulder were covered in blood which glistened black in the moonlight.
Behind them the armies collided with thuds clangs and screams. But despite the raging battle their Nilfgaardian pursuers hadnt forgotten about them. Three cavalrymen were galloping towards them.
The Witcher sprang up feeling a swelling wave of cold fury and hatred inside him. He jumped out to meet their pursuers drawing the horsemens attention away from Dandelion. But not because he wanted to sacrifice himself for his friend. He wanted to kill.
The leading rider who had pulled ahead flew at him with a raised battle-axe but had no way of knowing he was attacking a witcher. Geralt dodged the blow effortlessly and seized the Nilfgaardian leaning over in the saddle by his cloak while the fingers of his other hand caught the soldiers broad belt. He pulled the rider from the saddle with a powerful wrench and fell on him pinning him to the ground. Only then did Geralt realise he had no weapon. He caught the man by the throat but couldnt throttle him because of his iron gorget. The Nilfgaardian struggled hit him with an armoured gauntlet and gashed his cheek. The Witcher smothered his opponent with his entire body groped for the misericord in the broad belt and jerked it out of its sheath. The man on the ground felt it and howled. Geralt fended off the arm with the silver scorpion on the sleeve that was still hitting him and raised the dagger to strike.
The Nilfgaardian screamed.
The Witcher plunged the misericord into his open mouth. Up to the hilt.
When he got to his feet he saw horses without riders bodies and a cavalry unit heading away towards the battle. The Cintrans from the camp had dispatched their Nilfgaardian pursuers and had not even noticed the poet or the two men fighting on the ground in the gloom among the low pine trees.
Dandelion! Where were you hit? Wheres the arrow?
In my head… Its stuck in my head…
Dont talk nonsense! Bloody hell you were lucky… It only grazed you…
Im bleeding…
Geralt removed his jerkin and tore off a shirtsleeve. The point of the quarrel had caught Dandelion above the ear leaving a nasty-looking gash extending to his temple. The poet kept bringing his shaking hand up to the wound and then looking at the blood which was profusely spattering his hands and cuffs. His eyes were vacant. The Witcher realised he was dealing with a person who for the first time in his life had been wounded and was in pain. Who for the first time in his life was seeing his own blood in such quantities.
Get up he said wrapping the shirtsleeve quickly and clumsily around the troubadours head. Its nothing. Dandelion its only a scratch… Get up we have to get out of here fast…
The battle on the field raged on in the dark; the clatter of steel neighing of horses and screams grew louder and louder. Geralt quickly caught two Nilfgaardian steeds but it turned out one was sufficient. Dandelion managed to get up but immediately sat down again groaned and sobbed pitifully. The Witcher lifted him to his feet shook him back to consciousness and hauled him into the saddle.
Geralt mounted behind the wounded poet and spurred the horse east to where–above the already visible pale blue streaks of the dawn–hung the brightest star of the Seven Goats constellation.
Dawn will be breaking soon Milva said looking not at the sky but at the glistening surface of the river. The catfish are tormenting the small fry. But theres neither hide nor hair of the Witcher or Dandelion. Oh I hope Regis didnt mess up—
Dont tempt fate Cahir muttered adjusting the girth of the recovered chestnut colt.
Milva looked around for a piece of wood to knock on.
… But it does seem to be like that… Whoever encounters your Ciri its as though theyve put their head on the block… That girl brings misfortune… Misfortune and death.
Spit that out Milva.
She spat obediently as superstition demanded.
Theres such a chill Im shivering… And Im thirsty but I saw another rotting corpse in the river near the bank. Phooey… I feel sick… I think Im going to throw up…
There you go Cahir said handing her a canteen. Drink that. And sit down close to me Ill keep you warm.
Another catfish struck a shoal of minnows in the shallows and they scattered near the surface in a silver hail. A bat or nightjar flashed past in a beam of moonlight.
Who knows Milva muttered pensively cuddling up to Cahir what tomorrow will bring. Wholl cross that river and wholl perish.
What will be will be. Drive those thoughts away.
Arent you afraid?
I am. What about you?
I feel sick.
There was a lengthy pause.
Tell me Cahir when did you meet Ciri?
For the first time? Three years ago. During the fight for Cintra. I got her out of the city. I found her beset by fire. I rode through the fire through the flames and smoke holding her in my arms. And she was like a flame herself.
And?
You cant hold a flame in your hands.
If it isnt Ciri in Nilfgaard she said after a long silence then who is it?
I dont know.
Drakenborg the Redanian fortress converted into an internment camp for elves and other subversive elements had some grim traditions which had evolved during its three years of operation. One of those traditions was dawn hangings. Another was gathering all those under death sentences in a large common cell from which they were led out to the gallows at daybreak.
About a dozen of the condemned were grouped together in the cell and every morning two three–or occasionally four–of them were hanged. The others waited their turn. A long time. Sometimes as long as a week. The condemned were called Clowns. Because the mood around the death cell was always jolly. Firstly at meals prisoners were served very thin sour wine nicknamed Dijkstra Dry in the camp as it was no secret that they could enjoy it at the behest of the head of the Redanian secret service. Secondly no one was dragged to the sinister underground Wash House to be interrogated any longer nor were the warders allowed to maltreat the convicts.
The tradition was also observed that night. It was merry in the cell being occupied by six elves a half-elf a halfling two humans and a Nilfgaardian. Dijkstra Dry was poured onto a single shared tin plate and lapped up without the use of the arms since that method gave the greatest chance of at least some intoxication by the gnats piss. Only one of the elves a Scoiatael from Iorweths defeated commando recently severely tortured in the Wash House retained his composure and dignity and was busy carving the words Freedom Or Death on a post. There were several hundred similar inscriptions on the posts around the cell. The remaining condemned convicts also in keeping with tradition sang the Clowns Anthem over and over again a song composed in Drakenborg by an unknown author. Every convict learned the words in the barracks as the song drifted to them at night from the condemned cell knowing that the day would come when they would join the choir.
The Clowns dance on the scaffold
Rhythmically twitching and jerking
They sing their song
Of sadness and beauty
And the Clowns have all the fun
Every corpse will recall
When the stools kicked away
And his eyes roll up to the sun.
The bolt rattled the key grated in the lock and the Clowns stopped singing. Warders entering at dawn could only mean one thing: in a moment the choir would be depleted by several voices. The only question was: whose?
The warders entered together. All were carrying ropes to tie the hands of the convicts being led to the scaffold. One sniffed shoved his cudgel under his arm unrolled a scroll of parchment and cleared his throat.
Echel Trogelton!
Traighlethan the elf from Iorweths commando corrected him softly. He looked at the carved slogan once more and struggled to his feet.
Cosmo Baldenvegg!
The halfling swallowed loudly. Nazarian knew Baldenvegg had been imprisoned on charges of acts of sabotage carried out on the instructions of the Nilfgaardian secret service. However Baldenvegg had not admitted his guilt and stubbornly maintained he had stolen both cavalry horses on his own initiative to make some money and that Nilfgaard had nothing to do with it. He had clearly not been believed.
Nazarian!
Nazarian stood up obediently and held his hands out for the warders to bind. When the three of them were being led out the rest of the Clowns took up the song.
The Clowns dance on the scaffold
Merrily twitching and jerking
And the wind carries their song
The chorus echoing all around…
The dawn glowed purple and red heralding a beautiful sunny day.
The Clowns Anthem thought Nazarian was misleading. They could not dance a jaunty jig since they were not hanged from a gibbet with a cross beam but from ordinary posts sunk into the ground. They didnt have stools kicked from under them but practical low birch blocks bearing the marks of frequent use. The songs anonymous author who had been executed the previous year could not have known that when he composed it. Like all the other convicts he was only acquainted with the details shortly before his death. In Drakenborg the executions were never carried out in public. They were a just punishment and not sadistic vengeance. Those words were also attributed to Dijkstra.
The elf from Iorweths commando shook the warders hands off stepped onto the block without hesitation and allowed the noose to be placed around his neck.
Long li—
The block was kicked out from under his feet.
The halfling required two blocks which were placed one on top of the other. The alleged saboteur did not bother with any grandiloquent cries. His short legs kicked vigorously and then sagged against the post. His head lolled slackly on his shoulder.
When the warders seized Nazarian he suddenly changed his tune.
Ill talk! he croaked. Ill testify! I have important information for Dijkstra!
Bit late for that said Vascoigne the deputy commander for political affairs at Drakenborg who was assisting at the execution doubtingly. The sight of the noose rouses the imagination in every second one of you!
Im not making it up! Nazarian appealed struggling in the executioners arms. Ive got information!
Less than an hour later Nazarian was sitting in a seclusion cell delighting in the beauty of life. A messenger stood at readiness beside his horse scratching his groin vigorously and Vascoigne was reading and checking the report which was about to be sent to Dijkstra.
I humbly inform Your Lordship that the felon by the name of Nazarian sentenced for an assault on a royal official has testified to the following: that acting on the orders of a certain Ryens on the day of the July new moon this year with two of his accomplices the elven half-breed Schirrú and Millet he did take part in the murder of the jurists Codringher and Fenn in the city of Dorian. Millet was killed there but the half-breed Schirrú murdered the two jurists and set their house on fire. The felon Nazarian shifts all the blame onto the said Schirrú denies and refutes any suggestion that he committed the murders but that is probably owing to fear of the gallows. What may interest Your Lordship however is that prior to the crime against the jurists being committed the said malefactors (that is Nazarian the half-elf Schirrú and Millet) were hunting a witcher a certain Gerald of Rivia who had been holding secret meetings with the jurist Codringher. To what end the felon Nazarian does not know because neither the aforementioned Ryens nor the half-elf Schirrú did divulge the secret to him. But when Ryens was given the report concerning their collusions he ordered the jurists to be destroyed.
The felon Nazarian further testified that his accomplice Schirrú stole some documents from the jurists which were later delivered to Ryens at an inn called the Sly Fox in Carreras. What Ryens and Schirrú conversed about there is not known to Nazarian but the following day the criminal trio travelled to Brugge where on the fourth day after the new moon they committed the abduction of a maiden from a red-brick house on the door of which a pair of brass shears were affixed. Ryens drugged her with a magic potion and the malefactors Schirrú and Nazarian conveyed her in great haste by carriage to the stronghold of Nastrog in Verden. And now a matter which I commend to Your Lordships close attention: the malefactors handed the abducted maid over to the strongholds Nilfgaardian commandant assuring him that the said individual was Cyryla of Cintra. The commandant as testified by the felon Nazarian was greatly content with these tidings.
I dispatch the above in strict confidence to Your Lordship by messenger. I shall likewise send an exhaustive report of the interrogation when the scribe has made a fair copy. I humbly request instructions from Your Lordship as to what to do with the felon Nazarian. Whether to order him stung with a bullwhip so that he remembers more or hang him according to regulations.
Your loyal servitor.
Vascoigne signed the report with a flourish affixed a seal and summoned the messenger.
Dijkstra was acquainted with the contents of the report that evening; Philippa Eilhart by noon of the following day.
By the time the horse carrying the Witcher and Dandelion emerged from the riverside alders Milva and Cahir were extremely agitated. They had heard the battle as the water of the Ina carried the sounds a great distance.
As she helped lift the poet down from the saddle Milva saw Geralt stiffening at the sight of the Nilfgaardian. However she did not say anything–and neither did the Witcher–for Dandelion was moaning desperately and swooning. They laid him down on the sand placing a folded-up cloak beneath his head. Milva had just set about changing the blood-soaked makeshift dressing when she felt a hand on her shoulder and smelled the familiar scent of wormwood aniseed and other herbs. Regis as was his custom had appeared unexpectedly out of thin air.
Let me he said pulling instruments and other paraphernalia from his sizeable medical bag Ill take it from here.
When the barber-surgeon peeled the dressing from the wound Dandelion groaned pitifully.
Relax Regis said cleansing the wound. Its nothing. Only blood. Only a little blood… Your blood smells nice poet.
At precisely that moment the Witcher did something Milva would never have expected. He walked over to the horse and drew a long Nilfgaardian sword from the scabbard fastened under the saddle flap.
Move away from him he snarled standing over the barber-surgeon.
The blood smells nice Regis repeated not paying the slightest bit of attention to the Witcher. I cant detect in it the smell of infection which with a head wound could have disastrous consequences. The main arteries and veins are intact… This will sting a little.
Dandelion groaned and took a sharp intake of breath. The sword in the Witchers hand vibrated and glistened with light reflected from the river.
Ill put in a few stitches Regis said continuing to ignore both the Witcher and his sword. Be brave Dandelion.
Dandelion was brave.
Almost done here Regis said setting about bandaging the victims head. Dont you worry Dandelion youll be right as rain. The wounds just right for a poet Dandelion. Youll look like a war hero with a proud bandage around your head and the hearts of the maidens looking at you will melt like wax. Yes a truly poetic wound. Unlike an abdominal wound for instance. Liver all cut up kidneys and guts mangled stomach contents and faeces pouring out peritonitis… Right thats done. Geralt Im all yours.
He stood and the Witcher brought the sword up against his throat as quick as lightning.
Move away he snapped at Milva. Regis didnt twitch even though the point of the sword was pressing gently against his neck. The archer held her breath seeing the barber-surgeons eyes glowing in the dark with a strange cat-like light.
Go on Regis said calmly. Thrust it in.
Geralt Dandelion spoke from the ground totally alert. Are you utterly insane? He saved us from the gallows… And patched me up…
He saved us and the girl in the camp Milva recalled softly.
Be quiet all of you. You dont know what he is.
The barber-surgeon did not move. And Milva suddenly saw what she ought to have seen long before: Regis did not cast a shadow.
Indeed he said slowly. You dont know what I am. And its time you did. My name is Emiel Regis Rohellec Terzieff-Godefroy. I have lived on this earth for four hundred and twenty-eight years according to your reckoning or six hundred and forty-two years by the elven calendar. Im the descendant of survivors unfortunate beings imprisoned here after the cataclysm you call the Conjunction of the Spheres. Im regarded to put it mildly as a monster. As a blood-sucking fiend. And now Ive encountered a witcher who earns his living eliminating creatures such as I. And thats it.
And that is enough Geralt said lowering the sword. More than enough. Now scram Emiel Regis Whatever-It-Was. Get out of here.
Astonishing. Regis sneered. Youre permitting me to leave? Me who represents a danger to people? A witcher ought to make use of every opportunity to eliminate dangers of this kind.
Get lost. Make yourself scarce and do it fast.
To which far-flung corner should I make myself scarce? Regis asked slowly. Youre a witcher after all. You know about me. When youve dealt with your problem when youve sorted out whatever you need to sort out youll probably return to these parts. You know where I live where I spend my time how I earn my keep. Will you come after me?
Its possible. If theres a bounty. I am a witcher.
I wish you luck Regis said fastening his bag and spreading his cape. Farewell. Ah one more thing. How high would the price on my head have to be in order for you to bother? How high do you value me?
Bloody high.
You tickle my vanity. To be precise?
Fuck off Regis.
Im going. But first put a value on me. If you please.
Ive usually taken the equivalent of a good saddle horse for an ordinary vampire. But you after all are not ordinary.
How much?
I doubt the Witcher said his voice as cold as ice I doubt whether anyone could afford it.
I understand and thank you the vampire said smiling. This time he bared his teeth. At the sight Milva and Cahir stepped back and Dandelion stifled a cry of horror.
Farewell. Good luck.
Farewell Regis. Same to you.
Emiel Regis Rohellec Terzieff-Godefroy shook his cape wrapped himself up in it with a flourish and vanished. He simply vanished.
And now Geralt said spinning around the unsheathed sword still in his hand its your turn Nilfgaardian…
No Milva interrupted angrily. Ive had a bellyful of this. To horse lets get out of here! Shouts carry over the water and before we know it someone will be hot on our trail!
Im not going any further in his company.
Go on alone then! she yelled furious. The other way! Im up to here with your moods Witcher! Youve driven Regis away even though he saved your life and thats your business. But Cahir saved me so were comrades! If hes an enemy to you go back to Armeria. Suit yourself! Your mates are waiting for you there with a noose!
Stop shouting.
Well dont just stand there. Help me get Dandelion onto the gelding.
You rescued our horses? Roach too?
He did she said nodding towards Cahir. Lets be going.
They forded the Ina. They rode along the right-hand bank alongside the river through shallow backwaters through wetlands and old riverbeds through swamps and marshes resounding with the croaking of frogs and the quacking of unseen mallards and garganeys. The day exploded with red sunlight blindingly sparkling on the surfaces of small lakes overgrown with water lilies and they turned towards a point where one of the Inas numerous branches flowed into the Yaruga. Now they were riding through tenebrous gloomy forests where the trees grew straight from the marsh green with duckweed.
Milva led the way riding beside the Witcher busy giving him an account of Cahirs story in hushed tones. Geralt was as silent as the grave never once looking back at the Nilfgaardian who was riding behind them helping the poet. Dandelion moaned a little from time to time swore and complained that his head was hurting but held out bravely without slowing down the march. His mood had improved with the recovery of Pegasus and the lute fastened to the saddle.
Around noon they rode out once more into sunny wetlands beyond which the broad calm waters of the Great Yaruga stretched out. They forced their way through dried-up riverbeds and waded through shallows and backwaters. And happened upon an island a dry spot among the marshes and tussocks of grass between the rivers numerous offshoots. The island was overgrown with bushes and willows and there were a few taller trees growing on it bare withered and white from cormorants guano.
Milva was the first to notice a boat among the reeds which must have been deposited there by the current. She was also the first to spot a clearing among the osiers which was a perfect place for a rest.
They stopped and the Witcher decided it was time to talk to the Nilfgaardian. Face to face and without witnesses.
I spared your life on Thanedd. I felt sorry for you whippersnapper. Its the biggest mistake Ive ever made. Early this morning I let a higher vampire go even though he is certain to have several human lives on his conscience. I ought to have killed him. But I couldnt be bothered with him for Im preoccupied with one thought: to get my hands on the people who harmed Ciri. Ive sworn that those whove harmed her will pay for it with their blood.
Cahir did not speak.
Your revelations which Milva has told me about dont change anything. Theres only one conclusion: you were unable to abduct Ciri on Thanedd despite your best efforts. Now youre trailing me so that I can lead you to her. So that you can get your hands on her again because then your imperator might spare you and not send you to the scaffold.
Cahir said nothing. Geralt felt bad. Very bad.
She cried out in the night because of you he snapped. You grew to nightmarish proportions in her childs eyes. But actually you were–and are–only a tool a wretched minion of your imperator. I dont know what you did to become a nightmare for her. And the worst thing is I dont understand why in spite of everything I cant kill you. I dont understand whats holding me back.
Perhaps Cahir said softly that despite all the circumstances and appearances we have something in common you and I.
You reckon?
Like you I want to rescue Ciri. Like you I dont care if that surprises or astonishes anybody. Like you I have no intention of justifying my motives to anybody.
Is that all?
No.
Very well go on.
Ciri the Nilfgaardian began slowly is riding a horse through a dusty village. With six other young people. Among those people is a girl with close-cropped hair. Ciri is dancing on a table in a barn and is happy…
Milva has told you about my dreams.
No. She hasnt told me anything. Do you believe me?
No.
Cahir lowered his head and ground his heel in the sand.
Id forgotten he said that you cant believe me cant trust me. I understand that. But like you I had one more dream. A dream you havent told anyone about. Because I seriously doubt that youd want to tell anyone about it.
It could be said that Servadio was simply in luck. He had come to Loredo without intending to spy on anyone in particular. But the village wasnt called the Bandits Lair for no reason. Loredo lay on the Bandits Trail and brigands and thieves from all the regions of the Upper Velda called in there met up to sell or barter loot to stock up with provisions and tackle and relax and enjoy themselves in the select company of fellow criminals. The village had been burnt down several times but the few permanent and more numerous temporary residents would rebuild it each time. They lived off the bandits and did very well thank you. And snoopers and narks like Servadio always had the opportunity to pick up some information there which might be worth a few florins to the prefect.
This time Servadio was counting on more than just a few. Because the Rats were riding into the village.
They were led by Giselher and flanked by Iskra and Kayleigh. Behind them rode Mistle and the new flaxen-haired girl they called Falka. Asse and Reef brought up the rear pulling some riderless horses doubtlessly stolen with intent to sell. The Rats were tired and dust-covered but bore themselves briskly in the saddle enthusiastically responding to greetings from the various comrades and acquaintances they happened to see. After dismounting and being given beer they immediately entered noisy negotiations with traders and fences. All of them except Mistle and the new flaxen-haired one who wore a sword slung across her back. These two set off among the stalls which as usual covered the village green. Loredo had its market days and the range of goods on offer (with the visiting bandits in mind) was especially rich and varied then. Today was such a day.
Servadio cautiously followed the girls. In order to make any money he had to have information and in order to have information he had to eavesdrop.
The girls looked at colourful scarves beads embroidered blouses saddlecloths and ornate browbands for their horses. They sifted through the goods but didnt buy anything. Mistle kept a hand on the fair-haired girls shoulder almost the whole time.
The snooper cautiously moved closer pretending to be looking at the straps and belts on a leatherworkers stall. The girls were talking but quietly. He couldnt hear them and was too afraid to approach them any closer. They might have noticed grown suspicious.
Candyfloss was being sold at one of the stalls. The girls walked over Mistle bought two sticks wrapped round with the snow-white sweetmeat and handed one to the flaxen-haired girl. She nibbled it delicately. A white strand stuck to her lip. Mistle wiped it off with a careful tender movement. The flaxen-haired girl opened her emerald-green eyes widely slowly licked her lips and smiled cocking her head playfully. Servadio felt a shudder a cold trickle running between his shoulder blades. He recalled the rumours going around about the two female bandits.
He was going to withdraw stealthily since it was clear he wouldnt pick up any useful information. The girls werent talking about anything important. However not far away where the senior members of various bandit gangs were gathered Giselher Kayleigh and the others were noisily quarrelling haggling and yelling every now and then holding mugs under the tap of a small cask. Servadio was likely to learn more from them. One of the Rats might let something slip if only a single word betraying the gangs current plans their route or their destination. Should he manage to eavesdrop and supply the information in time to the prefects soldiers or the Nilfgaardian spies who showed a lively interest in the Rats the reward was practically his for the taking. And were the prefect to set a successful trap thanks to his information Servadio could count on a considerable injection of funds. Ill buy the old lady a sheepskin coat he thought feverishly. Ill finally get the kids some shoes and maybe some toys… And for me…
The girls wandered between the stalls licking and nibbling the candyfloss from the sticks. Servadio suddenly noticed they were being watched. And pointed at. He knew who was doing the pointing; footpads and horse thieves from the gang of Pinta also known as Otterpelt.
The thieves exchanged several provocatively loud comments and cackled with glee. Mistle squinted and placed her hand on the flaxen-haired girls shoulder.
Turtle doves! one of the thieves snorted. He was a beanpole with a moustache like a bunch of oakum. Look theyll be billing and cooing next! Servadio saw the flaxen-haired girl tense up and noticed that Mistles grip on her shoulder tightened. The thieves all chuckled. Mistle turned around slowly and several of them stopped laughing. But the one with the oakum moustache was either too drunk or too lacking in imagination to take the hint.
Maybe one of you needs a man? he said moving closer and making obscene suggestive movements. All you need is a good shag and youll cure that kink in a flash! Hey! Im talking to you you—
He didnt manage to touch her. The flaxen-haired girl coiled up like an attacking adder and her sword flashed and struck before the candyfloss she released had hit the ground. The moustachioed thief staggered and gobbled like a turkey the blood from his butchered neck gushing in a long stream. The girl coiled up again was on him in two nimble steps and struck once more a wave of gore splashing the stalls. The corpse toppled over the sand around it immediately turning red. Someone screamed. A second thief leant over and drew a knife from his bootleg but at the same moment slumped struck by Giselher with the metal handle of his knout.
One stiffs enough! the Rats leader yelled. That ones only got himself to blame; he didnt know who he was crossing! Back off Falka!
Only then did the flaxen-haired girl lower her sword. Giselher took out a purse and shook it.
According to the laws of our brotherhood Im paying for the man who was killed. Fairly according to his weight a thaler for every pound of the lousy cadaver! And thatll put an end to the feud! Am I right comrades? Pinto what do you say?
Iskra Kayleigh Reef and Asse stood behind their leader. They had faces of stone and held their hands on their sword hilts.
Thats fair Otterpelt replied surrounded by his gang. He was a short bow-legged man in a leather tunic. Youre right Giselher. The feuds over.
Servadio swallowed trying to melt into the crowd now gathering at the scene. He swiftly lost all interest in stalking the Rats or the flaxen-haired girl they called Falka. He decided that the reward promised by the prefect was not nearly as high as hed thought.
Falka calmly sheathed her sword and looked around. Servadio was dumbstruck at the sudden change in her expression.
My candyfloss the girl whined miserably looking at her treat lying soiled in the sand. I dropped my candyfloss…
Mistle hugged her.
Ill buy you another.
The Witcher sat on the sand among the willows gloomy angry and lost in thought. He was looking at the cormorants sitting on the shit-covered tree.
After their conversation Cahir had vanished into the bushes and had not reappeared. Milva and Dandelion were looking for something to eat. They had managed to find a copper cauldron and a trug of vegetables under some nets in the boat which had been washed up by the current. They set a wicker trap they had found in the boat in a riverside channel then waded near to the bank and began hitting the rushes with sticks in order to drive fish into it. The poet was now feeling better and was strutting around as proud as a peacock with his heroically bandaged head.
Geralt continued to brood and sulk.
Milva and Dandelion hauled the fish pot out and began to swear for instead of the catfish and carp they had expected all they saw was silvery fry wriggling around inside.
The Witcher stood up.
Come over here you two! Leave that trap and come here. Ive got something to tell you.
Youre returning home he began bluntly when they came over wet and stinking of fish. Head north towards Mahakam. Im going on by myself.
What?
Now we must go our separate ways. The partys over Dandelion. Youre going home to write poems. Milva will lead you through the forests… Whats the matter?
Nothings the matter Milva said tossing her hair from her shoulder with a sudden movement. Nothing. Speak Witcher. Id like to hear what youre going to say.
I dont have anything else to say. Ill go south crossing to the Yarugas far bank. Through Nilfgaardian territory. Itll be a dangerous and long journey. And theres no time to waste. Which is why Im going by myself.
Having got rid of the inconvenient baggage. Dandelion nodded. The ball and chain slowing down your march and causing so many problems. In other words: me.
And me Milva added glancing to one side.
Listen Geralt said now much more calmly. This is my own private matter. None of this concerns you. I dont want you to risk your necks for something that only concerns me.
It only concerns you Dandelion repeated slowly. You dont need anybody. Company impedes you and slows down your journey. You dont expect help from anybody and you have no intention of relying on anybody. Furthermore you love solitude. Have I forgotten anything?
Naturally Geralt replied angrily. Youve forgotten to swap your empty head for one with a brain. Had that arrow passed an inch to the right you idiot the rooks would be pecking out your eyes now. Youre a poet and youve got an imagination; so try imagining a scene like that. I repeat: youre returning north and Im heading in the opposite direction. By myself.
Go on then Milva said and sprang to her feet. Im not going to plead with you. Go to hell Witcher. Come on Dandelion lets cook something. Im starving and listening to him makes me sick.
Geralt turned his head away. He watched the green-eyed cormorants hanging their wings out to dry on the limbs of the guano-covered tree. He smelled the intense scent of herbs and swore furiously.
Youre trying my patience Regis.
The vampire who had suddenly appeared out of thin air was unconcerned and sat down alongside the furious witcher.
I have to change the poets dressing he said calmly.
Then go to him. But stay well away from me.
Regis heaved a sigh showing no intention of moving away.
I was listening to your conversation with Dandelion and the archer he said not without a hint of mockery in his voice. I have to admit youve got a real talent for winning people over. Though the entire world seems to be out to get you you disregard the comrades and allies wanting to help you.
The world turned upside down. A vampires teaching me how to deal with humans. What do you know about humans Regis? The only thing you know is the taste of their blood. Why am I still talking to you?
The world turned upside down the vampire admitted deadpan. You are talking to me indeed. Perhaps youd also like to listen to some advice?
No. No I wouldnt. I dont need to.
True Id forgotten. Advice is superfluous to you allies are superfluous youll get by without any travelling companions. The goal of your expedition is after all personal and private. More than that the nature of the goal demands that you accomplish it alone in person. The risks dangers hardships and constant struggle with doubt must only burden you. For after all they are components of the penance the expiation of guilt you want to earn. A baptism of fire Id say. Youll pass through fire which burns but also purges. And youll do it alone. For were someone to support you in this help you take on even a scrap of that baptism of fire that pain that penance they would by the same token impoverish you. They would deprive you of part of the expiation you desire which would be owed to them for their involvement. After all it should be your exclusive expiation. Only you have a debt to pay off and you dont want to run up debts with other creditors at the same time. Is my logic correct?
Surprisingly so considering youre sober. Your presence annoys me vampire. Leave me alone with my expiation please. And with my debt.
As you wish Regis said arising. Sit and think. But I will give you some advice anyway. A sense of guilt as well as the need for expiation for a cleansing baptism of fire arent things you can claim an exclusive right to. Life differs from banking because it has debts which are paid off by running up debts with others.
Go away please.
As you wish.
The vampire walked off and joined Dandelion and Milva. While Regis changed the dressing the trio debated what to eat. Milva shook the fry from the fish pot and examined the catch critically.
Theres nothing for it she said. Well have to skewer the little tiddlers on twigs and grill them over the embers.
No Dandelion demurred shaking his freshly bandaged head that isnt a good idea. There are too few of them and they wont fill us up. I suggest we make soup.
Fish soup?
By all means. We have enough of these tiddlers and we have salt Dandelion said counting out the list of ingredients on his fingers. Weve acquired onions carrots parsley root and celery. And a cauldron. If we put it all together we end up with soup.
Some seasoning would come in handy.
Oh. Regis smiled reaching into his bag. No problem there. Basil pimento pepper bay leaves sage…
Enough enough. Dandelion raised his hand stopping him. Thatll do. We dont need mandrake in the soup. Right lets get to work. Clean the fish Milva.
Clean them yourself! Ha! Just because youve got a woman in the company it doesnt mean shell slave for you in the kitchen! Ill bring the water and start the fire. And you can get yourself covered in guts with those weatherfish.
They arent weatherfish Regis said. Theyre chub roach ruff and silver bream.
Ah Dandelion said unable to keep quiet. I see you know your fish.
I know lots of things Regis replied neutrally without boasting. Ive picked up this and that along the way.
If youre such a scholar Milva said blowing on the fire again and getting to her feet use your brain to get these tiddlers gutted. Im getting the water.
Can you manage a full cauldron? Geralt help her.
Course I can. Milva snorted. And I dont need his help. He has his own–personal–issues. No ones to disturb him!
Geralt turned his head away pretending not to hear. Dandelion and the vampire skilfully prepared the small fry.
This soups going to be thin Dandelion said hanging the cauldron over the fire. We could do with a bigger fish.
Will this do? Cahir said suddenly emerging from the willows carrying a three-pound pike by the gills. It was still flexing its tail and opening and closing its mouth.
Oh! What a beauty! Where did you come by that Nilfgaardian?
Im not a Nilfgaardian. I come from Vicovaro and my name is Cahir—
All right all right we know all that. Now where did you get the pike?
I knocked up a tip-up using a frog as bait. I cast it into a hollow under the bank. The pike took it right away.
Experts to a man Dandelion said shaking his bandaged head. Pity I didnt suggest steak you would have conjured up a cow. But lets make a start on what weve got. Regis chuck all the fry into the cauldron heads and tails and all. And the pike needs to be nicely dressed. Know how to Nilf—Cahir?
Yes.
Get to work then. Geralt dammit do you plan to sit there sulking for much longer? Peel the vegetables!
The Witcher got up obediently and joined them but stayed ostentatiously well away from Cahir. Before he had time to complain that there wasnt a knife the Nilfgaardian–or possibly the Vicovarian–gave him his taking another from his bootleg. Geralt took it grunting his thanks.
The teamwork was carried out efficiently. The cauldron full of fingerlings and vegetables was soon bubbling and frothing. The vampire dextrously skimmed off the froth using a spoon Milva had whittled. Once Cahir had dressed and divided up the pike Dandelion threw the predators tail fins spine and toothed head into the cauldron and stirred.
Mmm it smells delicious. Once its all boiled down well strain off the waste.
What through our footwraps? Milva said with a grimace as she whittled another spoon. How can we strain it without a sieve?
But my dear Milva smiled Regis. Dont say that! We can easily replace what we dont have with what we do. Its purely a matter of invention and positive thinking.
Go to hell with your smart-arsed chatter vampire.
Well sieve it through my hauberk Cahir said. Not a problem it can be rinsed out afterwards.
It should be rinsed out before too Milva declared or I wont eat it.
The sieving was carried out efficiently.
Now throw the pike into the broth Cahir Dandelion instructed. Smells delicious. Dont add any more wood it just needs to simmer. Geralt where are you shoving that spoon! You dont stir it now!
Dont yell. I didnt know.
Ignorance–Regis smiled–is no justification for ill-conceived actions. When one doesnt know or has doubts its best to seek advice…
Shut up vampire! Geralt said stood up and turned his back on them. Dandelion snorted.
Hes taken offence look at him.
Thats him all over Milva said pouting. Hes all talk. If he doesnt know what to do he just talks and gets offended. Havent you lot caught on yet?
A long time ago Cahir said softly.
Add pepper Dandelion said licking the spoon and smacking his lips. And some more salt. Ah now its just right. Take the cauldron off the heat. By thunder its hot! I dont have any gloves…
I have Cahir said.
And I Regis said seizing the cauldron from the other side dont need any.
Right said the poet wiping the spoon on his trousers. Well company be seated. Enjoy! Geralt are you waiting for a special invitation? For a herald and a fanfare?
They sat crowded around the cauldron on the sand and for a long time all that could be heard was dignified slurping interrupted by blowing on spoons. After half of the broth had been eaten the cautious fishing out of pieces of pike began until finally their spoons were scraping against the bottom of the cauldron.
Oh Im stuffed Milva groaned. It wasnt a bad idea with that soup Dandelion.
Indeed Regis agreed. What do you say Geralt?
I say thank you the Witcher said getting up with difficulty and rubbing his knee which had begun to torment him again. Will that do? Or do you want a fanfare?
Hes always like that the poet said waving a hand. Take no notice of him. Youre lucky anyway. I was around when he was fighting with that Yennefer of his; the wan beauty with ebony hair.
Be discreet the vampire admonished Dandelion and dont forget he has problems.
Problems said Cahir stifling a burp are there to be solved.
Of course they are Dandelion replied. But how?
Milva snorted making herself more comfortable on the hot sand.
The vampire is a scholar. Hes sure to know.
Its not about knowledge but about the skilful examination of the circumstances Regis said calmly. And when the circumstances are examined we come to the conclusion that we are facing an insoluble problem. The entire undertaking has no chance of success. The likelihood of finding Ciri amounts to zero.
But you cant say that Milva jibed. We should think positively and use inventigation. Its like it was with that sieve. If we dont have something we find a replacement. Thats how I see it.
Until recently the vampire continued we thought Ciri was in Nilfgaard. Reaching the destination and rescuing her–or abducting her–seemed beyond our powers. Now after hearing Cahirs revelations we have no idea where Ciri is. Its hard to talk about invention when we have no idea where we should be directing it.
What are we to do then? Milva said bridling. The Witcher insists on going south…
For him–Regis laughed–the points of the compass have no great importance. Its all the same to him which one he chooses as long as hes not idle. That is truly a witchers principium. The world is full of evil so its sufficient to stride ahead and destroy the Evil encountered on the way in that way rendering a service to Good. The rest takes care of itself. To put it another way: being in motion is everything the goal is nothing.
Baloney Milva commented. I mean Ciris his goal. How can you say shes nothing?
I was joking the vampire admitted winking at Geralts back which was still turned away from them. And not very tactfully. I apologise. Youre right dear Milva. Ciri is our goal. And since we dont know where she is it would make sense to find that out and direct our activities accordingly. The case of the Child of Destiny I observe is simply pulsating with magic fate and other supernatural elements. And I know somebody who is extremely knowledgeable about such matters and will certainly help us.
Ah Dandelion said delighted. Whos that? Where are they? Far from here?
Closer than the capital of Nilfgaard. In actual fact really quite close. In Angren. On this bank of the Yaruga. Im talking about the Druids Circle which has its seat in the forests of Caed Dhu.
Lets go without delay!
Dont any of you Geralt said annoyed think you should ask me my opinion?
You? Dandelion said turning around. But you havent got a clue what youre doing. You even owe the soup you gobbled down to us. Were it not for us youd be hungry. We would be too had we waited for you to act. That cauldron of soup was the result of cooperation. Of teamwork. The joint efforts of a fellowship united by a common goal. Get it friend?
How could he get it? Milva said grimacing. Hes just me me by myself all alone. A lone wolf! But you can see hes no hunter that hes a stranger to the forest. Wolves dont hunt alone! Never! A lone wolf ha what twaddle foolish townie nonsense. But he doesnt understand that!
Oh he does he does Regis cut in smiling through pursed lips as was his custom.
He only looks stupid Dandelion confirmed. But I do keep hoping hell finally decide to strain his grey matter. Perhaps hell come to some useful conclusions. Perhaps hell realise the only activity thats worth doing alone is wanking.
Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach remained tactfully silent.
The hell with all of you the Witcher finally said sticking his spoon into his bootleg. The hell with all of you you cooperative fellowship of idiots united by a common goal which none of you understand. And the hell with me too.
This time the others following Cahirs example also remained tactfully silent. Dandelion Maria Barring also known as Milva and Emiel Regis Rohellec Terzieff-Godefroy.
What a company I ended up with Geralt continued shaking his head. Brothers in arms! A team of heroes! What have I done to deserve it? A poetaster with a lute. A wild and lippy half-dryad half-woman. A vampire whos about to notch up his fifth century. And a bloody Nilfgaardian who insists he isnt a Nilfgaardian.
And leading the party is the Witcher who suffers from pangs of conscience impotence and the inability to take decisions Regis finished calmly. I suggest we travel incognito to avoid arousing suspicion.
Or raising a laugh Milva added.
The queen replied: Ask not me for mercy but those whom you wronged with your magic. You had the courage to commit those deeds now have courage when your pursuers and justice are close at hand. It is not in my power to pardon your sins. Then the witch hissed like a cat and her sinister eyes flashed. My end is nigh she shrieked but yours is too O Queen. You shall remember Lara Dorren and her curse in the hour of your dreadful death. And know this: my curse will hound your descendants unto the tenth generation. Seeing however that a doughty heart was beating in the queens breast the evil elven witch ceased to malign her or try to frighten her with the curse but began instead to whine for help and mercy like a bitch dog…
The Tale of Lara Dorren
as told by the humans
… but her begging softened not the stony hearts of the Dhoine the merciless cruel humans. So when Lara now not begging for mercy for herself but for her unborn child caught hold of the carriage door on the order of the queen the thuggish executioner struck with a sword and hacked off her fingers. And when a severe frost descended in the night Lara breathed her last on the forested hilltop giving birth to a tiny daughter whom she protected with the remains of the warmth still flickering in her. And though she was surrounded by the blizzard the night and the winter spring suddenly bloomed on the hilltop and feainnewedd flowers blossomed. Even today do those flowers bloom in only two places: in Dol Blathanna and on the hilltop where Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal perished.
The Tale of Lara Dorren
as told by the elves
CHAPTER SIX
I asked you Ciri who was lying on her back snapped angrily. I asked you not to touch me.
Mistle withdrew her hand and the blade of grass she had been tickling Ciris neck with stretched out beside her and gazed up at the sky placing both hands under her shaven neck.
Youve been acting strangely of late Young Falcon.
I just want you to stop touching me!
Its just for fun.
I know Ciri said through pursed lips. Just for fun. Its always been just for fun. But Ive stopped enjoying it do you see? For me its no fun any more!
Mistle was silent for a long while lying on her back and staring at the blue sky riven with ragged streaks of cloud. A hawk circled high above the trees.
Your dreams she finally said. Its because of your dreams isnt it? You wake almost every night screaming. What you once lived through now returns in your dreams. Im no stranger to such things myself.
Ciri did not answer.
Youve never told me anything about yourself Mistle said breaking the silence once again. About what youve been through. Or where youre from. Or if youve left anyone behind…
Ciri brought a hand up swiftly to her neck but this time it was only a ladybird.
There were a few people she said quietly not looking at her companion. I mean I thought there were… People who would find me even here at the end of the world if they only wanted to… Or if they were still alive. Oh what do you want of me Mistle? Do you want me to unbosom myself?
You dont have to.
Good. Because surely itd just be for fun. Like everything else we share.
I dont understand Mistle said turning her head away why you dont leave if being with me is so awful.
I dont want to be alone.
Is that all?
That is a lot.
Mistle bit her lip. But before she had time to say anything there was a whistle. They both sprang to their feet brushing off pine needles and ran to their horses.
The funs about to begin said Mistle leaping into the saddle and drawing her sword. The fun youve come to enjoy more than anything Falka. Dont think I havent noticed.
Ciri angrily kicked her horse with her heels. They hurtled along the side of a ravine at breakneck speed already hearing the wild whooping of the remaining Rats rushing out of a thicket on the other side of the highway. The pincers of the ambush were closing.
The private audience was over. Vattier de Rideaux Viscount of Eiddon head of Imperator Emhyr var Emreiss military intelligence left the library bowing to the Queen of the Valley of Flowers even more politely than courtly protocol demanded. At the same time his bow was very cautious and his movements deliberate and guarded; the imperial spys eyes never left the two ocelots stretched out at the feet of the elven queen. The golden-eyed cats looked languorous and drowsy but Vattier knew they werent cuddly mascots but vigilant guards ever ready to reduce anyone to a bloody pulp if they tried to come closer to the queen than protocol decreed.
Francesca Findabair also called Enid an Gleanna the Daisy of the Valleys waited until the door was closed behind Vattier and stroked the ocelots.
Very well Ida she said.
Ida Emean aep Sivney elven sorceress one of the free Aen Seidhe from the Blue Mountains during the audience shrouded by an invisibility spell materialised in a corner of the library and smoothed down her dress and vermilion-red hair. The ocelots only reacted with a slight widening of their eyes. Like all cats they could see what was invisible and could not be deceived by a simple spell.
This parade of spies is beginning to annoy me Francesca said with a sneer finding a more comfortable position on the ebony chair. Henselt of Kaedwen sent me a consul not long ago. Dijkstra dispatched a trade mission to Dol Blathanna. And now the arch-spy Vattier de Rideaux himself! Oh and some time ago Stephan Skellen the Grand Imperial Nobody was creeping around too. But I didnt give him an audience. Im the queen and Skellens a nobody. He may hold a position but hes a nobody nonetheless.
Stephan Skellen Ida Emean said slowly visited us too and was more fortunate. He spoke with Filavandrel and Vanadain.
And like Vattier with me did he enquire about Vilgefortz Yennefer Rience and Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach?
Among other things. It may surprise you but he was more interested in the original version of Ithlinne Aegli aep Aeveniens prophecy particularly the parts about Aen Hen Ichaer the Elder Blood. He was also curious about Tor Lara the Tower of Gulls and the legendary portal which once connected the Tower of Gulls to Tor Zireael the Tower of Swallows. How typical of humans Enid. To expect that at a single nod we shall unravel enigmas and mysteries for them which we have been endeavouring to solve for centuries.
Francesca raised her hand and examined the rings adorning it.
I wonder she said whether Philippa knows about the strange preoccupation of Skellen and Vattier. And of Emhyr var Emreis whom they both serve.
It would be risky to assume she doesnt Ida Emean replied looking keenly at the queen and to withhold what we know from Philippa and the entire lodge at the council in Montecalvo. It wouldnt show us in a very favourable light… And we want the lodge to come into being. We want to be trusted–we elven sorceresses–and not to be suspected of playing a double game.
But we are playing a double game Ida. And playing with fire: with the White Flame of Nilfgaard…
Fire burns Ida Emean said raising her heavily made-up eyes at the queen but it also purifies. It must be passed through. Risks have to be taken Enid. The lodge ought to exist ought to begin functioning. At full strength. Twelve sorceresses including the one mentioned in the prophecy. Even if it is a game let us rely on trust.
And if its an entrapment?
You know the individuals involved better than I do.
Enid an Gleanna thought for a while.
Sheala de Tancarville she finally said is a secretive recluse without any loyalties. Triss Merigold and Keira Metz were loyal but they are now both emigrants since King Foltest drove all the mages from Temeria. Margarita Laux-Antille cares for her school and nothing besides. Of course at this moment the last three are heavily under Philippas sway and Philippa is an enigma. Sabrina Glevissig will not give up the political influence she has in Kaedwen but will not betray the lodge either. She is too attracted by the power it can give her.
And what about Assire var Anahid? And the other Nilfgaardian whom we shall meet in Montecalvo?
I know little about them. Francesca smiled faintly. But once I see them I shall know more. As soon as I see how they are dressed.
Ida Emean lowered her painted eyelids but refrained from asking a question.
This leaves us with the jade statuette she said a moment later. The still dubious and enigmatic jade figurine mentioned in the Ithlinnespeath Ithlinnes Prophecy. I now deem its time to allow her to express herself. And to tell her what she may expect. Shall I help you with the decompression?
No I shall do it myself. You are familiar with reactions to unpacking. The fewer the witnesses the less painful a blow it will be to her pride.
Francesca Findabair checked one more time that the entire courtyard was thoroughly isolated from the rest of the palace by a protective field which hid it from view and muffled its sounds. She lit three black candles planted in candlesticks equipped with parabolic mirrors. The candlesticks stood at points marked out by a circular mosaic pavement depicting the eight signs of Vicca the elven zodiac on the symbols indicating Belleteyn Lammas and Yule. Inside the zodiac circle the mosaic formed another smaller circle dotted with magic symbols and enclosing a pentagram. Francesca placed small iron tripods on three symbols of the smaller circle and then on each of them she carefully mounted three crystals. The cut of the crystals bases corresponded to the form of the tripods tops which meant their placement could be nothing other than precise but even so Francesca checked everything several times. She didnt want to leave anything to chance.
A fountain was trickling nearby the water gushing from a marble jug held by a marble naiad. It fell into the pool in four streams and made the water lilies between which goldfish darted quiver.
Francesca opened a jewellery case removed a small waxy jade figurine from it and placed it precisely at the centre of the pentagram. She withdrew glanced once again at the grimoire lying on a table took a deep breath raised her hands and chanted a spell.
The candles burst into bright flame the crystals facets lit up and sparkled with streaks of light. Those streaks of light shot towards the figurine which immediately changed colour from green to gold and a moment later became transparent. The air shimmered with magical energy which struck against the protective field. Sparks flew from one of the candles shadows played on the floor the mosaic came alive and the shapes in it transformed. Francesca did not lower her hands or interrupt the incantation.
The statuette grew at lightning speed pulsating and throbbing its structure and shape changing like a cloud of smoke crawling across the floor. The light shining from the crystals pierced the air; movement and congealing matter appeared in the streams of light. A moment later a human body suddenly manifested in the centre of the magical circles. It was the figure of a black-haired woman lying inertly on the floor.
The candles bloomed with ribbons of smoke and the crystals went out. Francesca lowered her arms relaxed her fingers and wiped the sweat from her forehead.
The black-haired woman on the floor curled up in a ball and began to scream.
What is your name? Francesca asked in a breathy voice.
The woman convulsed and howled both hands clutching her belly.
What is your name?
Ye… Yennef… Yennefeerrr!!! Aaaaaagh…
The elf sighed with relief. The woman continued to squirm and howl banging her fists against the floor and retching. Francesca waited patiently. And calmly. The woman–a moment earlier a jade figurine–was suffering that was obvious. And normal. But her mind was undamaged.
Well Yennefer she said after a long pause interrupting the groans. That ought to do oughtnt it?
Yennefer raised herself onto her hands and knees with obvious effort wiped her nose with her wrist and looked around vacantly. Her gaze flitted over Francesca as though the she-elf wasnt even in the courtyard then came to rest–and brightened–at the sight of the fountain gushing water. Having crawled up to it with immense difficulty Yennefer hauled herself over the lip and flopped into the pool with a splash. She choked began to splutter cough and spit until finally parting the water lilies she waded to the marble naiad and sat down leaning back against the pedestal of the statue. The water came up to her breasts.
Francesca… she mumbled touching the obsidian star hanging from her neck and looking at the she-elf with a slightly clearer gaze. Its you…
Its me. What do you recall?
You packed me up… Hells teeth you packed me up didnt you!
I packed you up and then unpacked you. What do you recall?
Garstang… Elves. Ciri. You. And the fifty tons suddenly landing on my head… Now I know what it was. Artefact compression…
Your memorys working. Good.
Yennefer lowered her head and looked between her thighs over which goldfish were darting.
The water in the pool will need changing Enid she mumbled. I just peed in it.
No matter. Francesca smiled. But just see if theres any blood in the water. Compression has been known to damage the kidneys.
Only the kidneys? Yennefer said taking a cautious breath. I dont think theres a single undamaged organ in my body… At least thats how I feel. Hells teeth Enid I really dont know what I did to deserve this…
Get out of the pool.
No. I like it here.
I know. Its called dehydration.
Degradation. Depredation! Why did you do it to me?
Get out Yennefer.
The sorceress stood up with difficulty holding onto the marble naiad with both hands. She shook off the water lilies with a sharp tug tore away her dripping dress and stood naked before the fountain under the gushing streams. After rinsing herself down and drinking deeply she stepped out of the pool sat down on the edge wrung out her hair and looked around.
Where am I?
In Dol Blathanna.
Yennefer wiped her nose.
Do the hostilities on Thanedd continue?
No. They ended a month and a half ago.
I must have wronged you greatly Yennefer said a moment later. I must really have got under your skin Enid. But you can consider us even. Youve exacted a full revenge if a little too sadistic. Couldnt you have just cut my throat?
Dont talk nonsense the elf said making a face. I packed you up and got you out of Garstang to save your life. Well come back to that but a little later. Here have this towel. And this sheet. Youll get a new dress after youve bathed–in a suitable place in a tub full of warm water. Youve done enough damage to my goldfish.
Ida Emean and Francesca were drinking wine. Yennefer was drinking sugar water and carrot juice. In huge quantities.
To sum up she said after hearing Francescas account. Nilfgaard has defeated Lyria in an alliance with Kaedwen has dismantled Aedirn burnt down Vengerberg subjugated Verden and is crushing Brugge and Sodden at this very moment. Vilgefortz has disappeared without a trace. Tissaia de Vries has committed suicide and youve become queen of the Valley of Flowers. Imperator Emhyr has rewarded you with a crown and sceptre in exchange for my Ciri whom he was hunting for so long and whom he now has in his power and is using as he sees fit. You packed me up and have kept me in a box as a jade statuette for a month and a half. And no doubt expect me to thank you for it.
It would be polite Francesca Findabair replied coldly. On Thanedd there was a certain Rience who had made it a point of honour to submit you to a slow and cruel death and Vilgefortz offered to expedite it. Rience pursued you all over Garstang. But he didnt find you because you were already a jade figurine safe in my cleavage.
And I was that figurine for forty-seven days.
Yes. While I if asked could always reply that Yennefer of Vengerberg was not in Dol Blathanna. Because the question referred to Yennefer not a statuette.
What changed to induce you finally to unpack me?
A great deal changed. I shall explain forthwith.
First explain something else to me: the Witcher was also on Thanedd. Geralt. Remember I introduced him to you in Aretuza. How is he?
Please remain calm. Hes alive.
I am calm. Tell me Enid.
In the space of an hour Francesca said your Witcher did more than some manage in their entire lives. Put succinctly: he broke Dijkstras leg beheaded Artaud Terranova and slew ten Scoiatael. Oh I almost forgot: he also aroused Keira Metzs unhealthy passions.
Dreadful Yennefer said with a grimace. But Keira will have got over it by now I imagine. I hope she doesnt hold a grudge against him. The fact that he didnt fuck her after inflaming her desire certainly resulted from lack of time not lack of respect. Please put her mind at ease for me.
Youll have the chance to do that yourself the Daisy of the Valleys said coldly. And quite soon. Lets go back though to the issues about which you are lamely feigning indifference. Your Witcher was so fervid in his defence of Ciri that he acted very rashly. He attacked Vilgefortz. And Vilgefortz gave him a sound thrashing. The fact that he didnt kill him certainly resulted from lack of time not lack of effort. Well? Are you still going to pretend you dont care?
No Yennefer said her grimace no longer expressing scorn. No Enid. I do care. Some people will soon learn how much. You can take my word for it.
Francesca was no more concerned by Yennefers threat than she had been by her mockery.
Triss Merigold teleported what was left of the Witcher to Brokilon she stated. As far as I know the dryads are still healing him. He is said to be recovering now but it would be better if he didnt venture out of the forest. Hes being tracked by Dijkstras spies and the military intelligence services of all the kings. So are you for that matter.
What did I do to deserve such attention? I didnt break anything of Dijkstras… Oh keep quiet and let me guess. I vanished without a trace from Thanedd. No one suspects I ended up in your pocket shrunken down and packed up. Everybody is convinced I escaped to Nilfgaard with my fellow conspirators. Everybody apart from the real conspirators naturally but they wont be correcting that error. For a war is raging and disinformation is a weapon whose blade must always be kept sharp. And now forty-seven days later comes your moment to use that weapon. My house in Vengerberg is burnt to the ground and Im being hunted. Theres nothing left to do but join a Scoiatael commando. Or join the fight for the elves freedom in some other way.
Yennefer sipped her carrot juice and stared into the eyes of Ida Emean aep Sivney who still remained peaceful and silent.
Well Mistress Ida free lady of the Aen Seidhe from the Blue Mountains have I correctly guessed whats in store for me? Why are you so tight-lipped?
Because I Mistress Yennefer the red-headed she-elf answered say nothing when I have nothing sensible to say. Its always better than to make unfounded speculations and disguise ones anxiety with idle talk. Enid get to the point. Tell Mistress Yennefer what this is all about.
You have my undivided attention Yennefer said touching the obsidian star hanging from its velvet ribbon. Speak Francesca.
The Daisy of the Valleys rested her chin on her interlocked hands.
Today she announced is the second night of the full moon. In a short while we shall be teleporting to Montecalvo Castle the seat of Philippa Eilhart. We shall be taking part in a session of an organisation that ought to interest you. After all you were always of the opinion that magic represents the utmost value superior to all disputes conflicts political choices personal interests grudges sentiments and animosities. It will no doubt gladden you to hear that not long ago the foundations of an institution were laid down. Something like a secret lodge brought into being exclusively to defend the interests of magic meant to ensure that magic occupies the place it deserves in the hierarchy of the world. Exercising my privilege to recommend new members to this lodge I took the liberty of proposing two candidates: Ida Emean aep Sivney and you.
What an unexpected honour Yennefer sneered. From magical oblivion straight to a secret elite and omnipotent lodge which stands above personal grudges and resentments. But am I suitable? Will I find sufficient strength of character to rid myself of my grudges against the people who took Ciri from me cruelly beat a man who is dear to me and packed—
I am certain the she-elf interrupted that you will find sufficient strength of character Yennefer. I know you and know you are not lacking in strength of that kind. Neither are you lacking in ambition which ought to dispel your doubts about the honour and the advancement which has come your way. If you want though Ill tell you frankly: Im recommending you to the lodge because I consider you a person who deserves it and who may render the cause a significant service.
Thank you Yennefer responded the scornful smirk in no hurry to disappear from her lips. Thank you Enid. I truly feel the ambition hubris and self-adoration filling me up. Im ready to explode at any moment. And thats before I even begin wondering why you arent recommending one more elf from Dol Blathanna or a she-elf from the Blue Mountains instead of me.
You will find out why in Montecalvo Francesca replied coldly.
Id rather find out now.
Tell her Ida Emean muttered.
Its because of Ciri Francesca said after a moments thought raising her inscrutable eyes towards Yennefer. The lodge is interested in her and no one knows the girl as well as you. Youll learn the rest when we get there.
Agreed Yennefer said vigorously scratching a shoulder blade. Her skin dried out by the compression was still itching intolerably. Now tell me the names of the other members. Apart from you and Philippa.
Margarita Laux-Antille Triss Merigold and Keira Metz. Sheala de Tancarville of Kovir. Sabrina Glevissig. And two sorceresses from Nilfgaard.
An international womens republic?
Lets say.
They must still think Im an accomplice of Vilgefortz. Will they accept me?
They accepted me. The rest I leave to you. You will be asked to give an account of your relationship with Ciri. From the very beginning which–thanks to your witcher–was fifteen years ago in Cintra and right up until the events of a month and a half ago. Frankness and honesty will be absolutely paramount. And will confirm your loyalty to the lodge.
Who said theres anything to confirm? Isnt it too early to talk of loyalty? Im not even familiar with the statute or programme of this new institution…
Yennefer the she-elf interjected frowning slightly. Im recommending you to the lodge. But I have no intention of forcing you to do anything. Particularly not to be loyal. You have a choice.
I think I know what it is.
And you would be right. But it is still a free choice. Speaking for myself I still heartily encourage you to choose the lodge. Trust me; by doing so youll be helping Ciri much more effectively than by plunging headlong into a whirl of events which Im guessing you would love to do. Ciris life is in danger. Only our combined efforts can save her. When you have heard what is said in Montecalvo youll realise I was speaking the truth… Yennefer I dont like the gleam in your eyes. Give me your word you will not try to escape.
No. Yennefer shook her head covering the star on the velvet ribbon with her hand. No I will not Francesca.
I must warn you my dear. All Montecalvos stationary portals have a distorting blockade. Anyone who tries to enter or leave without Philippas permission will end up in a dungeon lined with dimeritium. Youll be unable to open your own teleportal without the appropriate components. I dont want to confiscate your star because you have to be in full possession of your faculties. But if you try any tricks… Yennefer I cannot allow—The lodge wont allow you to launch an insane one-woman attempt to rescue Ciri and seek vengeance. I still have your matrix and the spells algorithm. Ill shrink you and pack you into a jade statuette again. For several months this time. Or years if necessary.
Thank you for the warning. But I still will not give you my word.
Fringilla Vigo was putting on a brave face but she was anxious and stressed. She herself had often reprimanded young Nilfgaardian mages for uncritically yielding to stereotypical opinions and notions. She herself had regularly ridiculed the crude image painted by gossip and propaganda of the typical sorceress from the North: artificially beautiful arrogant vain and spoiled to the limits of perversion and often beyond them. Right now though the closer the sequence of teleportals brought her to Montecalvo Castle the greater she was racked by uncertainty about what she would find when she arrived at the secret lodge meeting. And about what awaited her. Her untrammelled imagination offered up images of impossibly gorgeous women with diamond necklaces resting on naked breasts with rouged nipples women with moist lips and eyes glistening from the effects of alcohol and narcotics. In her minds eye Fringilla could already see the gathering becoming a wild and depraved orgy accompanied by frenzied music aphrodisiacs and slaves of both sexes using exotic accessories.
The final teleportal left her standing between two black marble columns with dry lips her eyes watering from the magic wind and her hand tightly clenching her emerald necklace which filled the square neckline. Beside her materialised Assire var Anahid also visibly agitated. Nevertheless Fringilla had reason to suppose her friend was feeling uncomfortable owing to her new and unfamiliar outfit: a plain but very elegant hyacinth dress complemented with a small modest alexandrite necklace.
Her anxiety was dispelled at once. It was cool and quiet in the large hall which was lit by magical lanterns. There was no naked slave beating a drum nor girls with sequinned pubic mounds dancing on the table. Neither was there the scent of hashish or Spanish fly in the air. Instead the Nilfgaardian enchantresses were welcomed by Philippa Eilhart the lady of the castle; tastefully dressed grave courteous and businesslike. The others approached and introduced themselves and Fringilla sighed with relief. The sorceresses from the North were beautiful colourful and sparkled with jewellery but there was no trace of intoxicating substances or nymphomania in their eyes which were accentuated by understated make-up. Nor did any of them have naked breasts. Quite the opposite. Two of them had extremely modest gowns fastened up to the neck: the severe Sheala de Tancarville dressed in black and the young Triss Merigold with her blue eyes and exquisite auburn hair. The dark-haired Sabrina Glevissig and the blondes Margarita Laux-Antille and Keira Metz all had low-cut necklines only slightly more revealing than Fringillas.
The wait for other participants was filled by polite conversation during which all of them had the opportunity to say something about themselves. Philippa Eilharts tactful comments and observations swiftly and adroitly broke the ice although the only ice in the vicinity was on the food table which was piled high with a mountain of oysters. No other ice could be discerned. Sheala de Tancarville a scholar immediately found a great deal of common ground with the scholar Assire var Anahid while Fringilla quickly warmed towards the bubbly Triss Merigold. The conversation was accompanied by the greedy consumption of oysters. The only person not eating was Sabrina Glevissig a true daughter of the Kaedwen forests who took the liberty of expressing a scornful opinion about that slimy filth and a yen for a slice of cold venison with plums. Philippa Eilhart instead of reacting to the insult with haughty coolness tugged on the bell pull and a moment later meat was brought in inconspicuously and noiselessly. Fringillas astonishment was immense. Well she thought it takes all sorts.
The teleportal between the columns flared up and vibrated audibly. Utter amazement was painted on Sabrina Glevissigs face. Keira Metz dropped an oyster and a knife onto the ice. Triss stifled a gasp.
Three sorceresses emerged from the portal. Three she-elves. One with hair the colour of dark gold one of vermilion and the third of raven black.
Welcome Francesca Philippa said. In her voice was none of the emotion being expressed by her eyes which though she quickly narrowed. Welcome Yennefer.
I was given the privilege of filling two seats the golden-haired newcomer addressed as Francesca said melodiously undoubtedly noticing Philippas astonishment. Here are my candidates. Yennefer of Vengerberg who needs no introduction. And Mistress Ida Emean aep Sivney an Aen Saevherne from the Blue Mountains.
Ida Emean slightly inclined her head and her mass of red curls and rustled her floating daffodil-yellow dress.
May I assume Francesca said looking around that we are all here now?
Only Vilgefortz is missing Sabrina Glevissig hissed quietly but with unfeigned anger looking askance at Yennefer.
And the Scoiatael hiding in the cellars Keira Metz muttered. Triss froze her with a look.
Philippa made the introductions. Fringilla watched Francesca Findabair with curiosity–Enid an Gleanna the Daisy of the Valleys the illustrious Queen of Dol Blathanna the queen of the elves who had not long before recovered their country. The rumours about Francescas beauty were not exaggerated thought Fringilla.
The red-headed and large-eyed Ida Emean clearly aroused everybodys interest including both sorceresses from Nilfgaard. The free elves from the Blue Mountains maintained contact neither with humans nor with their own kind living closer to humans. The few Aen Saevherne–or Sages–among the free elves were an almost legendary enigma. Few–even among elves–could boast of a close relationship with the Aen Saevherne. Ida did not only stand out in the group by the colour of hair. There was not a single ounce of metal nor a carat of stone in her jewellery; she wore only pearls coral and amber.
However the source of the greatest emotions was unsurprisingly the third of the new arrivals: Yennefer dressed in black and white and with raven-black hair who was no elf despite first impressions. Her arrival in Montecalvo must have been an immense surprise and a not entirely pleasant one. Fringilla felt an aura of antipathy and hostility emanating from some of the sorceresses.
While the Nilfgaardian sorceresses were being introduced to her Yennefer let her violet eyes rest on Fringilla. They were tired and had dark circles around them which even her make-up was unable to hide.
We know each other she said touching the obsidian star hanging from its velvet ribbon.
A heavy silence pregnant with anticipation suddenly descended on the chamber.
Weve already met Yennefer spoke again.
I dont recall Fringilla said without looking away.
Im not surprised. But I have a good memory for faces and figures. I saw you from Sodden Hill.
In which case there can be no mistake Fringilla Vigo said and raised her head proudly sweeping her eyes over all those present. I was at the Battle of Sodden.
Philippa Eilhart forestalled a response.
I was there too she said. And I also have many recollections. I dont think however that excessive straining of the memory or unnecessary rummaging around in it will bring us any benefit here in this chamber. What we plan to undertake here will be better served by forgetting forgiving and being reconciled with each other. Do you agree Yennefer?
The black-haired sorceress tossed her curly locks away from her forehead.
When I finally learn what youre trying to do here she replied Ill tell you what I agree with Philippa. And what I dont agree with.
In that case it would be best if we began without delay. Please would you take your places ladies.
The seats at the round table–apart from one–had place cards. Fringilla sat down beside Assire var Anahid with the unnamed seat on her right separating her from Sheala de Tancarville beyond whom Sabina Glevissig and Keira Metz took their places. On Assires left sat Ida Emean Francesca Findabair and Yennefer. Philippa Eilhart occupied the place exactly opposite Assire with Margarita Laux-Antille on her right and Triss Merigold on her left.
All of the chairs had armrests carved in the shape of sphinxes.
Philippa began. She repeated the welcome and immediately got down to business. Fringilla to whom Assire had given a detailed report of the lodges previous meeting learned nothing new from the introduction. Neither was she surprised by the declarations made by all the sorceresses to join the lodge nor the first contributions to the discussion. She was somewhat disconcerted however that those first voices related to the war the Empire was waging with the Nordlings and in particular the operation in Sodden and Brugge which had been begun a short time before during which the imperial forces had clashed with the Temerian Army. In spite of the lodges statutory political neutrality the sorceresses were unable to hide their views. Some were clearly anxious about the close proximity of Nilfgaard. Fringilla had mixed feelings. She had assumed that such educated people would understand that the Empire was bringing culture prosperity order and political stability to the North. On the other hand though she didnt know how she would have reacted herself were foreign armies approaching her home.
However Philippa Eilhart had clearly heard enough discussion about military matters.
No one is capable of predicting the outcome of this war she said. What is more predictions of that kind are pointless. Its time we looked at this matter with a dispassionate eye. Firstly war is not such a great evil. Id be more afraid of the consequences of overpopulation which at this stage of the growth of agriculture and industry would lead to famine. Secondly war is an extension of the kings politics. How many of those who are reigning now will be alive in a hundred years? None of them thats obvious. How many dynasties will last? Theres no way of predicting. In a hundred years todays territorial and dynastic conflicts todays ambitions and hopes will be dust in the history books. But if we dont protect ourselves if we allow ourselves to be drawn into the war nothing but dust will remain of us too. If however we look a little beyond the battle flags if we close our ears to the cries of war and patriotism we shall survive. And we must survive. We must because we bear responsibility. Not towards kings and their local interests focused on the concerns of one kingdom. We are responsible for the whole world. For progress. For the changes which accompany this progress. We are responsible for the future.
Tissaia de Vries would have expressed it differently Francesca Findabair said. She was always concerned with responsibility towards the common man. Not in the future but here and now.
Tissaia de Vries is dead. Were she alive she would be here among us.
No doubt the Daisy of the Valleys smiled. But I dont think she would have agreed with the theory that war is a remedy for famine and overpopulation. Pay attention to the language used here honourable sisters. We are debating using the Common Speech which is meant to ease understanding. But for me its a foreign language; one becoming more and more foreign. In the language of my mother the expression the common man does not exist and the common elf would be a coinage. The late lamented Tissaia de Vries was concerned with the fate of ordinary humans. To me the fate of ordinary elves is no less important. Id gladly applaud the idea of looking ahead and treating today as ephemera. But Im sorry to state that today paves the way for tomorrow and without tomorrow there wont be any future. For you humans perhaps the tears I shed over a lilac shrub burnt to ash during the turmoil of war are ridiculous. After all there will always be lilac shrubs; if not that one then another. And if there are no more lilac shrubs well therell be acacia trees. Forgive my botanical metaphors. But kindly note that what is a matter of politics to you humans is a matter of physical survival to the elves.
Politics dont interest me Margarita Laux-Antille the rectoress of the academy of magic announced loudly. I simply do not wish my girls whose education Ive dedicated myself to to be used as mercenaries pulling the wool over their eyes with slogans about love for ones homeland. The homeland of those girls is magic; thats what I teach them. If someone involves my girls in a war stands them on a new Sodden Hill they will be lost irrespective of the result on that battlefield. I understand your reservations Enid but were here to discuss the future of magic not issues of race.
We are here to discuss the future of magic Sabrina Glevissig repeated. But the future of magic is determined by the status of sorcerers. Our status. Our importance. The role we play in society. Trust respect and credibility general faith in our usefulness faith that magic is indispensable. The alternative we face seems simple: either a loss of status and isolation in ivory towers or service. Service even on the hills of Sodden even as mercenaries…
Or as servants and errand girls? Triss Merigold cut in tossing her beautiful hair off her shoulder. With bent backs ready to leap into action at every wag of the imperial finger? For thats the role we will be assigned by the Pax Nilfgaardiana should Nilfgaard conquer us all.
If it does Philippa said with emphasis. Anyhow we wont have much choice. For we have to serve. But serve magic. Not kings or imperators not their present politics. Not matters of racial integration because they are also subject to todays political goals. Our lodge my dear ladies was not brought into being for us to adapt to todays politics and daily changes on the front line. Or to feverishly search for solutions appropriate to the situation at hand changing the colour of our skin like chameleons. Our lodge must be active but its assigned role should be quite the opposite. And carried out using all the means we have at our disposal.
If I understand correctly Sheala de Tancarville said raising her head you are persuading us to actively influence the course of events. By fair means or foul? Including illegal measures?
What laws do you speak of? The ones governing the rabble? The ones written in the codices which we drew up and dictated to the royal jurists? We are only bound by one law. Our own!
I see. The sorceress from Kovir smiled. We then shall actively influence the course of events. Should the kings politics not be to our liking well simply change it. Correct Philippa? Or perhaps its better to overthrow all those crowned asses at once; dethrone them and drive them out. And seize power at once?
In the past we crowned kings who were convenient to us. Unfortunately we did not put magic on the throne. We have never given magic absolute power. Its time we corrected that mistake.
You have yourself in mind of course? Sabrina Glevissig said leaning across the table. On the Redanian throne naturally? Her Majesty Philippa the First? With Dijkstra as prince consort?
I was not thinking about myself. Nor was I thinking about the Kingdom of Redania. I have in mind the Kingdom of the North which the Kingdom of Kovir is today evolving into. An empire whose power will be equal to Nilfgaards thanks to which the currently oscillating scales of the world will finally come to rest in equilibrium. An empire ruled by magic which we shall raise to the throne by marrying the Kovirian crown prince to a sorceress. Yes you heard correctly dear sisters; you are looking in the right direction. Yes here at this table in this vacant seat we shall place the lodges twelfth sorceress. And then we shall put her on the throne.
The silence that fell was broken by Sheala de Tancarville.
An ambitious project indeed she said with a hint of derision in her voice. Truly worthy of us all here seated. It absolutely justifies establishing a lodge of this kind. After all less lofty tasks even ones that are tottering on the brink of reality and feasibility would be an affront to us. That would be like using an astrolabe to hammer in nails. No no it is best to set ourselves an utterly impossible task from the start.
Why call it impossible?
Have mercy Philippa. Sabrina Glevissig sighed. No king would ever wed a sorcereress. No society would accept a sorceress on the throne. An ancient custom stands in the way. A foolish one perhaps but it is there nevertheless.
There also exist Margarita Laux-Antille added obstacles of what I would call a technical nature. The sorceress who joined the House of Kovir would have to comply with a large number of conditions both from our point of view and that of the House of Kovir. Those conditions are mutually exclusive they contradict each other in obvious ways. Dont you see that Philippa? For us this person ought to be schooled in magic utterly dedicated to magic comprehending her role and capable of playing it deftly imperceptibly and without arousing suspicion. Without direction or prompt without any grey eminences standing in the shadows against whom rebels always first direct their anger in a revolution. And Kovir itself without any apparent pressure from us must also choose her as the wife of the heir to the throne.
That is obvious.
So who do you think Kovir would select given a free choice? A girl from a royal family whose royal blood flows back many generations. A very young woman suitable for a young prince. A girl who is fertile because this is about a dynasty. Such prerequisites rule you out Philippa. Rule me out rule out Keira and Triss even the youngest among us. They also rule out all the novices at my school who are anyhow of little interest to us; they are but buds the colour of whose petals are still unknown. Its unthinkable that any of them could occupy the twelfth empty seat at this table. In other words were Kovir to be afflicted with insanity and willing to marry their prince to a sorceress we couldnt find a suitable woman. Who then is to be this Queen of the North?
A girl from a royal family Philippa calmly replied in whose veins flows royal blood the blood of several great dynasties. Very young and capable of producing offspring. A girl with exceptional magical and prophetic abilities a carrier of the Elder Blood as the prophecies have heralded. A girl who will play her role with great aplomb without direction prompt sycophants or grey eminences because that is what her destiny demands. A girl whose true abilities are and will be known only to us: Cirilla daughter of Princess Pavetta of Cintra the granddaughter of the Queen Calanthe called the Lioness of Cintra. The Elder Blood the Icy Flame of the North the Destroyer and Restorer whose coming was prophesied centuries ago. Ciri of Cintra the Queen of the North. And her blood from which will be born the Queen of the World.
At the sight of the Rats bursting out of the ambush two of the horsemen escorting the carriage immediately turned tail and sped away. But they didnt stand a chance. Giselher helped by Reef and Iskra cut off their escape and after a short fight hacked them to pieces. Kayleigh Asse and Mistle fell on the other two who were prepared to defend the carriage and the four spotted horses harnessed to it desperately. Ciri felt disappointment and overwhelming anger. They hadnt left anyone for her. It looked as though she would have no one to kill.
But there was still one horseman riding in front of the carriage as an outrider lightly armed on a swift horse. He could have escaped but hadnt. He turned back swung his sword and dashed straight at Ciri.
She let him approach even somewhat slowing her horse. When he struck rising up in the stirrups she leant far out from the saddle skilfully ducking under his blade then sat back up pushing off hard against the stirrups. The horseman was quick and agile and managed to strike again. This time she parried obliquely and when the sword slid away she struck the horseman in the hand from below with a short lunge then swung her sword in a feint towards his face. He involuntarily covered his head with his left hand and she deftly turned the sword around in her hand and slashed him in the armpit a cut she had practised for hours at Kaer Morhen. The Nilfgaardian slid from his saddle fell to the ground lifted himself up onto his knees and howled like an animal desperately trying to staunch the blood gushing from his severed arteries. Ciri watched him for a moment as usual fascinated by the sight of a man fiercely fighting death with all his strength. She waited for him to bleed out. Then she rode off without looking back.
The ambush was over. The escort had been dispatched. Asse and Reef stopped the carriage seizing the reins of the lead pair. The postilion a young boy in colourful livery having been pushed from the right lead horse knelt on the ground crying and begging for mercy. The coachman threw down the reins and also begged for his life his hands placed together as though in prayer. Giselher Iskra and Mistle cantered over to the carriage and Kayleigh jumped off and jerked the door open. Ciri rode up and dismounted still holding her blood-covered sword.
In the carriage sat a fat matron in an old-fashioned gown and bonnet clutching a young and terribly pale girl in a black dress fastened up to the neck with a guipure lace collar. Ciri noticed she had a brooch pinned to her dress. A very pretty brooch.
Oh spotted horses! Iskra called looking at the rig. What beauties! Well get a few florins for this four!
And the coachman and postilion Kayleigh said grinning at the woman and the girl will pull the carriage to town once weve harnessed them up. And when we come to a hill these two fine ladies will help!
Highwaymen sirs! the matron in the old-fashioned gown whimpered clearly more horrified by Kayleighs hideous smile than the bloody steel in Ciris hand. I appeal to your honour! You surely will not outrage this young maiden.
Hey Mistle Kayleigh called smiling derisively your honours being appealed to!
Shut your gob. Giselher grimaced still mounted. Your jokes dont make anyone laugh. And you woman calm down. Were the Rats. We dont fight women and we dont harm them. Reef Iskra. Unharness the ponies! Mistle catch our mounts; were leaving!
We Rats dont fight with women. Kayleigh grinned once more staring at the ashen face of the girl in the black dress. We just have some fun with them occasionally if they have a yen. Well do you young lady? You havent got an itch between your legs have you? Please dont be shy. Just nod your little head.
Show some respect! the lady in the old-fashioned gown screamed her voice faltering. How dare you talk like that to the Much Honoured Barons daughter brigand!
Kayleigh roared with laughter then bowed extravagantly.
I beg for forgiveness. I didnt wish to offend. What maynt I even ask?
Kayleigh! Iskra called. Come here and stop dallying! Help us unharness these horses! Falka! Move it!
Ciri couldnt tear her eyes away from the coat of arms on the carriage doors: a silver unicorn on a black field. A unicorn she thought. I once saw a unicorn like that… When? In another life? Or perhaps it was only a dream.
Falka! Whats the matter?
I am Falka. But I wasnt always. Not always.
She gathered herself and pursed her lips. I was unkind to Mistle she thought. I upset her. I have to apologise somehow.
She placed a foot on the carriage steps staring at the brooch on the pale girls dress.
Hand it over she said bluntly.
How dare you? the matron choked. Do you know who you are speaking to? She is the noble-born daughter of the Baron of Casadei!
Ciri looked around making sure no one was listening.
A Barons daughter? she hissed. A petty title. And even if the snot were a countess she ought to curtsy before me arse close to the ground and head low. Give me the brooch! What are you waiting for? Should I tear it off along with the bodice?
The silence which fell at the table after Philippas declaration was quickly replaced by an uproar. The sorceresses vied with each other to voice their astonishment and disbelief demanding explanations. Some of them undoubtedly knew a great deal about the prophesied Queen of the North–Cirilla or Ciri–while for others the name was less familiar. Fringilla Vigo didnt know anything but she had her suspicions and was lost in conjecture mainly centred on a certain lock of hair. However when she asked Assire in hushed tones the sorceress said nothing and instructed her to remain silent too. Meanwhile Philippa Eilhart took the floor once again.
Most of us saw Ciri on Thanedd where she delivered prophecy in a trance and caused a great deal of confusion. Some of us are close–or even very close–to her. I have you in mind in particular Yennefer. Its your turn to speak.
When Yennefer was telling the assembly about Ciri Triss Merigold looked attentively at her. Yennefer spoke calmly and without emotion but Triss knew her too well and had known her for too long to be fooled. She had seen her in many situations including stressful ones which had exhausted her and led her to the verge of sickness and occasionally into it. Now without doubt Yennefer found herself in such a situation again. She looked distressed weary and ill.
The sorceress talked and Triss who knew both the story and the person it concerned discreetly observed the audience. Particularly the two sorceresses from Nilfgaard. The utterly transformed Assire var Anahid now dressed up but still feeling uncertain in her make-up and fashionable dress. And Fringilla Vigo the younger friendly naturally graceful and modestly elegant one with green eyes and hair as black as Yennefers but less luxuriant cut shorter and brushed down smoothly.
Neither of the Nilfgaardians gave the impression of being lost among the complexities of Ciris story even though Yennefers account was lengthy and tangled beginning with the infamous love affair between Pavetta of Cintra and the young man magically transformed into Urcheon. She recounted Geralts role and the Law of Surprise and the destiny linking the Witcher and Ciri. Yennefer talked about Ciri and Geralt meeting in Brokilon about the war about her being lost and found and about Kaer Morhen. About Rience and the Nilfgaardian agents hunting the girl. About her education in the Temple of Melitele and about Ciris mysterious abilities.
Theyre listening with such inscrutable expressions Triss thought looking at Assire and Fringilla. Like sphinxes. But they are clearly hiding something. I wonder what. Their astonishment? Since they couldnt have known who Emhyr had brought to Nilfgaard. Or is it that theyve known all this for a long time perhaps even better than we do? Yennefer will soon reach Ciris arrival on Thanedd and the prophecy she gave while in a trance which sowed so much confusion. About the bloody fighting in Garstang which left Geralt severely beaten and Ciri abducted.
Then the dissembling will be over Triss thought and the masks will fall. Everyone knows that Nilfgaard was behind the events on Thanedd. And when all eyes turn towards you Nilfgaardians you wont have a choice youll have to talk. And then certain matters will be explained and perhaps I shall find out more. Like how Yennefer managed to vanish from Thanedd and why she suddenly appeared here in Montecalvo with Francesca. Who is Ida Emean she-elf Aen Saevherne from the Blue Mountains and what role is she playing here? Why do I have the impression Philippa Eilhart reveals less than she knows even though she declares her devotion and loyalty to magic and not to Dijkstra… with whom she remains in unceasing contact?
And perhaps Ill finally learn who Ciri really is. Ciri; the Queen of the North to them but the flaxen-haired witcher-girl of Kaer Morhen to me. A girl I still think of as a younger sister.
Fringilla Vigo had heard something about witchers: individuals who earned their keep by killing monsters and beasts. She listened attentively to Yennefers story and to the sound of her voice and observed her face. She didnt let herself be deceived. The strong emotional relationship between Yennefer and Ciri–whom everyone found so fascinating–was clear as day. Interestingly enough the relationship between the sorceress and the Witcher she had mentioned was equally clear and equally strong. Fringilla began to reflect on this but was interrupted by raised voices.
She had already worked out that some of the assembled company had been in opposing camps during the rebellion on Thanedd so was not at all surprised by the antipathy expressed in the form of biting comments directed at Yennefer as she spoke. Just as an argument seemed inevitable Philippa Eilhart cut it short by unceremoniously slapping the table which made the cups jingle.
Enough! she shouted. Be quiet Sabrina! Dont let her goad you Francesca! Thats quite enough about Thanedd and Garstang. Its history!
History Fringilla thought with an astonishing sense of hurt. But history which they–even though they belonged to different camps–had a hand in. They made their mark. They knew what they were doing and why. And we imperial sorceresses dont know anything. We really are like errand girls who know what they are being sent to do but dont know why. Its good that this lodge is coming into being she deemed. The devil only knows how it will end but at least its beginning here and now.
Yennefer continue Philippa summoned.
I dont have anything else to say the black-haired sorceress answered through pursed lips. I repeat: Tissaia de Vries ordered me to bring Ciri to Garstang.
Its easy to blame the dead Sabrina Glevissig snarled but Philippa quietened her with a sharp gesture.
I didnt want to meddle in Aretuzas business Yennefer said pale and clearly disturbed. I wanted to take Ciri and escape Thanedd. But Tissaia convinced me that the girls appearance in Garstang would be a shock to many and that her prophecy would pour oil on troubled waters. Im not blaming her however because I agreed with her then. Both of us made a mistake. Mine was greater though. Had I left Ciri in Ritas care…
Whats done cannot be undone Philippa interrupted. Anyone can make a mistake. Even Tissaia de Vries. When did Tissaia see Ciri for the first time?
Three days before the conclave began Margarita Laux-Antille replied. In Gors Velen. I also made her acquaintance then. And I knew she was a remarkable individual the moment I saw her!
Extremely remarkable said the previously silent Ida Emean aep Sivney. For the legacy of remarkable blood is concentrated in her. Hen Ichaer the Elder Blood. Genetic material determining the carriers uncommon abilities. Determining the great role she will play. That she must play.
Because that is what elven legends myths and prophecies demand? Sabrina Glevissig asked with a sneer. Since the very beginning this whole matter has smacked of fairy-tales and fantasies! Now I have no doubts. My dear ladies I suggest we discuss something important rational and real for a change.
I bow before sober rationality; the power and source of your races great superiority Ida Emean said smiling faintly. Nonetheless here in the company of individuals capable of using a power which does not always lend itself to rational analysis or explanations it seems somewhat improper to disregard the elves prophecies. Neither our race nor our power draws its strength from rationality. In spite of that it has endured for tens of thousands of years.
The genetic material called the Elder Blood of which we are talking turned out to be a little less hardy however Sheala de Tancarville observed. Even elven legends and prophecies which I in no way disregard consider the Elder Blood to be utterly atrophied. Extinct. Am I right Mistress Ida? There is no more Elder Blood in the world. The last person in whose veins it flowed was Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal and we all know the legend of Lara Dorren and Cregennan of Lod.
Not all of us Assire var Anahid said speaking for the first time. I only studied your mythology cursorily and have never come across that legend.
It is not a legend Philippa Eilhart said but a true story. And there is one among us who not only knows the tale of Lara and Cregennan very well but also what came after which will certainly interest you all. Would you take up the story Francesca?
From what you say–the queen of the elves smiled–it would seem you know this tale no less thoroughly than I do.
Quite possibly. But I would nonetheless ask you to tell it.
In order to test my honesty and loyalty to the lodge Enid an Gleanna said nodding. Very well. I would ask you all to make yourselves comfortable for the story will not be a short one.
The story of Lara and Cregennan is a true story although today it is so overgrown with fairy-tale ornamentation it is difficult to recognise. There is also enormous variance between the legends human and elven versions; chauvinism and racial hatred can be heard in both of them though. Thus I shall refrain from embellishments and limit myself to dry facts. Cregennan of Lod was a sorcerer. Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal was an elven sorceress an Aen Saevherne a Sage one of the carriers of the Elder Blood which is even mysterious to we elves. The friendship–and later romance–between the two of them was at first joyfully acknowledged by both races but there soon appeared opponents to their union. Sworn enemies to the idea of melding human and elven magic who regarded it as betrayal. With the wisdom of hindsight there were also feuds of a personal nature at work: jealousy and envy. Put simply: Cregennan was assassinated and Lara Dorren hounded and hunted died of exhaustion in a wilderness after giving birth to a daughter. The baby was saved by a miracle. She was taken in by Cerro the Queen of Redania—
Only because she was terrified of the curse Lara cast when she refused to help and drove Lara out into the cold of winter Keira Metz said butting in. Had Cerro not adopted the child terrible calamities would have fallen on her and her entire family—
Those are precisely the fantastic ornaments Francesca has dispensed with Philippa Eilhart interrupted. Let us stick to facts.
The prophetic abilities of the Sages of the Elder Blood are facts Ida Emean said raising her eyes towards Philippa. And the evocative motif of prophecy which appears in every version of the legend is food for thought.
It is now and it was in the past Francesca confirmed. The rumours of Laras curse never died away and were even recalled seventeen years later when Riannon–the little girl Cerro had adopted–grew into a young woman whose beauty eclipsed even her mothers legendary looks. She bore the official title of Princess of Redania and many ruling houses were interested in making a match with her. When Riannon finally chose Goidemar the young King of Temeria from among many suitors it would not have taken much for rumours of the curse to thwart the marriage. However the rumours only became common knowledge three years after their wedding. During the Falka Rebellion.
Fringilla who had never heard of Falka or the rebellion raised her eyebrows. Francesca noticed it.
For the northern kingdoms she explained these are tragic and bloody events which live on in the memory though more than a century has passed. In Nilfgaard with whom the North had almost no contact at that time the matter is probably not known so I will take the liberty of briefly restating certain facts. Falka was the daughter of Vridank the King of Redania and the issue of a marriage he dissolved when he took a fancy to the beautiful Cerro–the same Cerro who later adopted Laras child. A document survives lengthily and circuitously stating the reasons for the divorce but a surviving miniature of Vridanks first wife an undoubtedly half-elf Kovirian noblewoman with predominantly human traits says a lot more. It depicts her with the eyes of a deranged hermit the hair of a drowned corpse and the mouth of a lizard. To cut a long story short: an ugly woman was sent back to Kovir with her year-old daughter Falka. And soon after the one and the other were both forgotten.
Falka Enid an Gleanna picked up after a while gave cause to be remembered five-and-twenty years later when she launched an uprising and murdered her own father Cerro and two of her stepbrothers allegedly with her own hands. The armed rebellion initially broke out as an attempt by the legally firstborn daughter supported by some of the Temerian and Kovirian nobility to gain the throne which was rightly hers. But it was soon transformed into a peasants revolt of immense proportions. Both sides committed gruesome atrocities. Falka passed into legend as a bloodthirsty demon although actually it is more likely she simply lost control of the situation and of the slogans displayed on the insurrectionary standards. Death To Kings; Death To Sorcerers; Death To Priests Nobility Gentry and Anybody Well-To-Do; and soon after: Death To Everyone and Everything for it became impossible to curb the blood-drenched evil mob. Then the rebellion began to spread to other countries…
Nilfgaardian historians have written about that Sabrina Glevissig interrupted with a distinct sneer. And Mistresses Assire and Vigo have undoubtedly read it. Keep it brief Francesca. Move on to Riannon and the Houtborg triplets.
But of course. Riannon issue of Lara Dorren adopted daughter of Cerro now the wife of Goidemar King of Temeria was accidentally seized by Falkas rebels and imprisoned in Houtborg Castle. She was pregnant at the time of her capture. The castle was still under siege long after the rebellion had been suppressed and Falka executed but Goidemar finally took it by storm and rescued his wife. And three children: two little girls who were already walking and a boy who was learning to. Riannon had been driven insane. The furious Goidemar put all the captives on the rack and from the shreds of their testimonies interspersed with groans constructed a plausible picture.
Falka who had inherited her looks more from her elven grandmother than her mother had generously bestowed her charms on all her officers in command from the noblemen to ordinary captains and thugs; by so doing ensuring their faithfulness and loyalty to her. She finally fell pregnant and gave birth to a child precisely at the same moment that Riannon–who was imprisoned in Houtborg–had twins. Falka ordered her infant to be raised with Riannons children. As she was later alleged to have said only queens were worthy of the honour of being wet nurses to her bastards and a similar fate would await every queen and princess in the new order Falka would build following her victory.
The problem was that no one not even Riannon knew which of the triplets was Falkas. It was surmised that it was most likely one of the girls because Riannon had reputedly given birth to a girl and a boy. I repeat most likely since in spite of Falkas boast the children were suckled by ordinary peasant wet nurses. Riannon could hardly remember anything when her insanity was finally cured. Yes she gave birth. Yes the triplets were occasionally brought to her bed and shown to her. But nothing more.
Sorcerers were summoned to examine the triplets and establish which was which. Goidemar was so unwavering that he intended–after ascertaining which was Falkas bastard–to publicly execute the child. We could not allow it. After the uprisings suppression unspeakable brutality had been inflicted on the captured rebels and it was time to put an end to it. The execution of a child before its second birthday? Can you imagine? What legends would have sprung up! And anyway it had already been rumoured that Falka herself had been born a monster as a result of Lara Dorrens curse. Nonsense of course since Falka had been born before Lara had even met Cregennan. But few people could be bothered to count the years. Pamphlets and other ridiculous documents were written about it and published clandestinely in Oxenfurt Academy. But I will return to the examination Goidemar ordered us to carry out—
Us? Yennefer asked looking up. Who precisely was that?
Tissaia de Vries Augusta Wagner Leticia Charbonneau and Hen Gedymdeith Francesca said calmly. I was later added to that body. I was a young sorceress but a pureblood elf. And my father… my biological father who disowned me… he was a Sage. I knew what the Elder Blood gene was.
And that gene was found in Riannon when you examined her and the king before studying the children Sheala de Tancarville stated. And in two of the children–although to different extents–which allowed Falkas bastard to be identified. How did you save the child from the kings wrath?
Very simply the she-elf smiled. By feigning ignorance. We told the king that the matter was complicated that we were still doing tests but that tests of that kind demanded time… A great deal of time. Goidemar an irascible but fundamentally good and noble man quickly cooled down and put no pressure on us while the triplets were growing and running around the palace bringing joy to the royal couple and the entire court. Amavet Fiona and Adela. The triplets were as alike as three sparrows. They were watched attentively of course and there were frequent suspicions particularly if one of the children was getting up to mischief. Fiona once tipped the contents of a chamber pot from a window right onto the Great Constable. He called her a demonic bastard and kissed goodbye to his post. Sometime later Amavet smeared tallow on the stairs and then when a splint was put on the arm of a certain lady-in-waiting she groaned something about accursed blood and soon afterwards said farewell to the court. More lowborn loudmouths made the acquaintance of the whipping post and the horsewhip. Thus everyone swiftly learned to hold their tongues. There was even a baron from an ancient family who Adela shot in the backside with an arrow who confined himself to—
Thats enough about the childrens pranks Philippa Eilhart interjected. When was Goidemar finally told the truth?
He was never told. He never asked which suited us.
But you knew which of the children was Falkas bastard?
Of course. It was Adela.
Not Fiona?
No. Adela. She died of the plague. The demonic bastard the accursed blood the daughter of the diabolical Falka helped the priests in the infirmary beyond the castle walls during an epidemic–in spite of the kings protests. She caught the plague from the sick children she was treating and died. She was seventeen. A year later her pseudo-brother Amavet became romantically involved with Countess Anna Kameny and was murdered by assassins hired by her husband. The same year Riannon died distraught and inconsolable after the death of two of her beloved children. Then Goidemar summoned us once more. For the King of Cintra Coram was showing an interest in the last of the famous triplets: Princess Fiona. He wanted her to marry his son also Coram but knew of the rumours and didnt want to go ahead with the match in case Fiona was indeed Falkas bastard. We staked our reputation on the fact that Fiona was a legitimate child. I dont know if he believed us but the young couple grew to like each other and thus Riannons daughter Ciris great-great-great-grandmother became the Queen of Cintra.
Introducing your celebrated gene to the Coram dynasty.
Fiona Enid an Gleanna said calmly was not a carrier of the Elder Blood gene which we had begun to call the Lara gene.
What do you mean exactly?
Well Amavet carried the Lara gene so our experiment went on. For Anna Kameny who inadvertently caused the death of both her lover and husband gave birth to twins while still in mourning. A boy and a girl. Their father must have been Amavet for the baby girl was a carrier. She was named Muriel.
Muriel the Impure? Sheala de Tancarville asked in astonishment.
She became that much later. Francesca smiled. At first she was Muriel the Delightful. Indeed she was a sweet charming child. When she was fourteen they were already calling her Doe-Eyed Muriel. Many men drowned in those eyes. She was finally given in marriage to Robert Count of Garramone.
And the boy?
Crispin. He wasnt a carrier so he was of no interest to us. If my memory serves he fell in combat somewhere for his passion was warfare.
Just a moment Sabrina said ruffling her hair vigorously. Wasnt Muriel the Impure the mother of Adalia the Seer?
Indeed Francesca confirmed. An interesting one was Adalia. A powerful Source excellent material for a sorceress. But she didnt want to be one unfortunately. She preferred to be a queen.
And the gene? Assire var Anahid asked. Did she bear it?
Interestingly not.
As I thought Assire said nodding. Laras gene can only be passed on inviolately down the female line. If the carrier is a man the gene disappears in the second or–at most–the third generation.
But wait—
It activates later however Philippa Eilhart broke in. After all Adalia who didnt have the gene was Calanthes mother and Calanthe Ciris grandmother carried the Lara gene.
She was the first carrier after Riannon Sheala de Tancarville said suddenly joining the discussion. You made a mistake Francesca. There were two genes. One the true gene was latent quiescent. You were beguiled by Amavets powerful distinct gene. However what Amavet had wasnt a gene but an activator. Mistress Assire is right. The activator travelling down the male line was so faint in Adalia you didnt identify it at all. Adalia was Muriels first child; her later-born definitely didnt have even a trace of the activator. Fionas latent gene would probably also have vanished in her male descendants at most in the third generation. But it didnt and I know why.
Bloody hell Yennefer hissed through her teeth.
Im lost Sabrina Glevissig declared. In this tangle of genetics and genealogy.
Francesca drew a fruit bowl towards herself held out a hand and murmured a spell.
I apologise for this vulgar display of psychokinesis she said with a smile making a red apple rise high above the table. But the fruit will help me demonstrate your mistake. Red apples are the Lara gene the Elder Blood. Green apples represent the latent gene. Pomegranates are the pseudo-gene the activator. Let us begin. This is Riannon the red apple. Her son Amavet is the pomegranate. Amavets daughter Muriel and his granddaughter Adalia are still pomegranates the last of which is very faint. And here is Fionas line Riannons daughter: a green apple. Her son Corbett the King of Cintra is green. Dagorad Corbett and Elen of Kaedwens son is green too. As you have observed in two successive generations there are exclusively male descendants. The gene is very weak and vanishes. So at the very bottom here we finish with a pomegranate and a green apple; Adalia the Princess of Maribor and Dagorad the King of Cintra. And the couples daughter was Calanthe. A red apple. The revived powerful Lara gene.
Fionas latent gene–Margarita Laux-Antille nodded–met Amavets activator gene through marital incest. Did no one notice their kinship? Did none of the royal heraldists or chroniclers pay any attention to this blatant incest?
It wasnt as blatant as it seems. After all Anna Kameny didnt advertise that her twins were bastards because her husbands family would have deprived her and her children of their coat of arms titles and fortune. Of course there were persistent rumours and not just among the peasantry. Thats why they had to search for a husband for Calanthe who was contaminated by incest in distant Ebbing beyond the rumours reach.
Add two more red apples to your pyramid Enid Margarita said. Now as Mistress Assire has astutely indicated we can see the reborn Lara gene moving smoothly down the female line.
Yes. Here is Pavetta Calanthes daughter. And Pavettas daughter Cirilla the sole inheritor of the Elder Blood carrier of the Lara gene.
The sole inheritor? Sheala de Tancarville asked abruptly. Youre very confident Enid.
What do you mean by that?
Sheala suddenly stood up snapped her beringed fingers towards the fruit bowl and made the remaining fruit levitate disrupting Francescas model and transforming it into a multi-coloured confusion.
This is what I mean she said coldly pointing at the jumble of fruit. Here we have all of the possible genetic combinations and permutations. And we know as much as we can see here. Namely nothing. Your mistake backfired Francesca and it caused an avalanche of errors. The gene only reappeared by accident after a century during which time we have no idea what may have occurred. Secret hidden hushed-up events. Premarital children extramarital children adoptive children–even changelings. Incest. The crossbreeding of races the blood of forgotten ancestors returning in later generations. In short: a hundred years ago you had the gene within arms reach even in your hands. And it gave you the slip. That was a mistake Enid a terrible mistake! Too much confusion too many accidents. Too little control too little interference in the randomness of it all.
We werent dealing Enid an Gleanna said through pursed lips with rabbits which we could pair off and put in a hutch.
Fringilla following Triss Merigolds gaze noticed Yennefers hands suddenly clenching her chairs carved armrests.
So this is what Yennefer and Francesca have in common Triss thought feverishly still avoiding her close friends gaze. Cynical duplicity. For after all pairing off and breeding turned out to be unavoidable. Indeed their plans for Ciri and the Prince of Kovir although apparently improbable are actually quite realistic. Theyve done it before. Theyve placed whoever they wanted on thrones created the marriages and dynasties they desired and which were convenient for them. Spells aphrodisiacs and elixirs were all used. Queens and princesses suddenly entered bizarre–often morganatic–marriages contrary to all plans intentions and agreements. And later those who wanted children but ought not to have them were secretly given contraceptive agents. Those who didnt want children but ought to have them were given placebos of liquorice water instead of the promised agents. Which resulted in all of those improbable connections: Calanthe Pavetta… and now Ciri. Yennefer was involved in this. And now she regrets it. Shes right to. Damn it were Geralt to find out…
Sphinxes Fringilla Vigo thought. The sphinxes carved on the chairs armrests. Yes they ought to be the lodges emblem. Wise mysterious silent. They are all sphinxes. They will easily achieve what they want. Its a trifle for them to marry Kovir off to that Ciri of theirs. They have the power to. They have the expertise. And the means. The diamond necklace around Sabrina Glevissigs neck is probably worth almost as much as the entire income of forested rocky Kaedwen. They could easily carry out their plans. But there is one snag…
Aha Triss Merigold thought at last weve reached the topic we should have started with: the sobering and discouraging fact that Ciri is in Nilfgaard in Emhyrs clutches. Far away from the plans being hatched here…
There is no question that Emhyr had been hunting for Cirilla for many years Philippa continued. Everyone assumed his goal was a political union with Cintra and control of the fiefdom which is her legal heritage. However one cannot rule out that rather than politics it concerns the gene of the Elder Blood which Emhyr wants to introduce to the imperial line. If Emhyr knows what we do he may want the prophecy to manifest itself in his dynasty and the future Queen of the World to be born in Nilfgaard.
A correction Sabrina Glevissig interrupted. Its not Emhyr who wants it but the Nilfgaardian sorcerers. They alone were capable of tracking down the gene and making Emhyr aware of its significance. Im sure the Nilfgaardian ladies here present will want to confirm that and explain their role in the intrigue.
I am astonished Fringilla burst out by your tendency to search for the threads of intrigue in distant Nilfgaard while the evidence requires us to search for conspirators and traitors much closer to you.
An observation as blunt as it is apt Sheala de Tancarville said silencing with a glance Sabrina who was preparing a riposte. All the evidence suggests that the facts about the Elder Blood were leaked to Nilfgaard from us. Is it possible youve forgotten about Vilgefortz ladies?
Not I Sabrina said a flame of hatred flaring in her black eyes for a second. I have not forgotten!
All in good time Keira Metz said flashing her teeth malevolently. But for the moment its not about him but about the fact that Emhyr var Emreis Imperator of Nilfgaard has Ciri–and thus the Elder Blood that is so important to us–in his grasp.
The Imperator Assire declared calmly glancing at Fringilla doesnt have anything in his grasp. The girl being held in Darn Rowan is not the carrier of any extraordinary gene. Shes ordinary to the point of commonness. Beyond a shadow of doubt she is not Ciri of Cintra. She is not the girl the Imperator was seeking. For he was clearly seeking a girl who carries the gene; he even had some of her hair. I examined it and found something I didnt understand; now I do.
So Ciri isnt in Nilfgaard Yennefer said softly. Shes not there.
Shes not there Philippa Eilhart repeated gravely. Emhyr was tricked; a double was planted on him. Ive known as much since yesterday. However Im pleased by Mistress Assires disclosure. It confirms that our lodge is now functioning.
Yennefer had great difficulty controlling the trembling of her hands and mouth. Keep calm she told herself. Keep calm; dont reveal anything; wait for an opportunity. Keep listening. Collect information. A sphinx. Be a sphinx.
So it was Vilgefortz Sabrina said slamming her fist down on the table. Not Emhyr but Vilgefortz. That charmer that handsome scoundrel! He duped Emhyr and us!
Yennefer calmed herself by breathing deeply. Assire var Anahid the Nilfgaardian sorceress feeling understandably uncomfortable in her tight-fitting dress was talking about a young Nilfgaardian nobleman. Yennefer knew who it was and involuntarily clenched her fists. A black knight in a winged helmet the nightmare from Ciris hallucinations… She sensed Francesca and Philippas eyes on her. However Triss–whose gaze she was trying to attract–was avoiding her eyes. Bloody hell Yennefer thought trying hard to remain impassive Ive landed myself in it. What bloody predicament have I tangled the girl up in? Shit how will I ever be able to look the Witcher in the eye…?
Thus well have a perfect opportunity Keira Metz called in an excited voice to rescue Ciri and strike at Vilgefortz at the same time. Well scorch the ground beneath the rascals arse!
Any scorching of ground must be preceded by the discovery of Vilgefortzs whereabouts Sheala de Tancarville the sorceress from Kovir whom Yennefer had never felt much affection for said mockingly. And no ones managed it so far. Not even some of the ladies sitting at this table who have devoted both their time and their extraordinary abilities to looking for it.
Two of Vilgefortzs numerous hideouts have already been found Philippa Eilhart responded coldly. Dijkstra is searching intensively for the remaining ones and I wouldnt write him off. Sometimes spies and informers succeed where magic fails.
One of the agents accompanying Dijkstra looked into the dungeon stepped back sharply leant against the wall and went as white as a sheet looking as though he would faint at any moment. Dijkstra made a mental note to transfer the milksop to office work. But when he looked into the cell himself he changed his mind. He felt his bile rising. He couldnt embarrass himself in front of his subordinates however. He unhurriedly removed a perfumed handkerchief from his pocket held it against his nose and mouth and leant over the naked corpse lying on the stone floor.
Belly and womb cut open he diagnosed struggling to maintain his calm and a cold tone. Very skilfully as if by a surgeons hand. The foetus was removed from the girl. She was alive when they did it but it was not done here. Are all of them like that? Lennep Im talking to you.
No… the agent said with a shudder tearing his eyes away from the corpse. The others had been garrotted. They werent pregnant… But we shall perform post-mortems…
How many were found in total?
Apart from this one four. We havent managed to identify any of them.
Thats not true Dijkstra countered from behind his handkerchief. Ive already managed to identify this one. Its Jolie the youngest daughter of Count Lanier. The girl who disappeared without a trace a year ago. Ill take a glance at the other ones.
Some of them are partially burnt Lennep said. They will be difficult to identify… But sire apart from this… we found…
Speak. Dont stammer.
There are bones in that well the agent said pointing at a hole gaping in the floor. A large quantity of bones. We have not removed or examined them but we can be sure they all belonged to young women. Were we to ask sorcerers for aid we might be able to identify them… and inform those parents who are still looking for their missing daughters…
Under no circumstances Dijkstra said swinging around. Not a word about whats been found here. To anyone. Particularly not to any mages. Im beginning to lose faith in them after what Ive seen here. Lennep have the upper levels been thoroughly searched? Has nothing been found that might help us in our quest?
Nothing sire Lennep said and lowered his head. As soon as we received word we rushed to the castle. But we arrived too late. Everything had burnt down. Consumed by a fearful conflagration. Magical without any doubt. Only here in the dungeons did the spell not destroy everything. I dont know why…
But I do. The fuse wasnt lit by Vilgefortz but by Rience or another of the sorcerers factotums. Vilgefortz wouldnt have made such a mistake he wouldnt have left anything but the soot on the walls. Oh yes he knows that fire purifies… and covers tracks.
Indeed it does Lennep muttered. There isnt even any evidence that Vilgefortz was here at all…
Then fabricate some Dijkstra said removing the handkerchief from his face. Must I teach you how its done? I know that Vilgefortz was here. Did anything else survive in the dungeons apart from the corpses? Whats behind that iron door?
Step this way sire the agent said taking a torch from one of the assistants. I will show you.
There was no doubt that the magical spark which had been meant to turn everything in the dungeon to ashes had been placed right there in the spacious chamber behind the iron door. An error in the spell had largely thwarted the plan but the fire had still been powerful and fierce. The flames had charred the shelves occupying one of the walls destroyed and fused the glass vessels turning everything into a stinking mass. The only thing left unaffected in the chamber was a table with a metal top and two curious chairs set into the floor. Curious but leaving no doubt as to their function.
They are constructed Lennep said swallowing and pointing at the chairs and the clasps attached to them so as to hold… the legs… apart. Wide apart.
Bastard Dijkstra snapped through clenched teeth. Damned bastard…
We found traces of blood faeces and urine in the gutter beneath the wooden chair the agent continued softly. The steel one is brand new most probably unused. I dont know what to make of it…
I do Dijkstra said. The steel one was constructed for somebody special. Someone that Vilgefortz suspected of special abilities.
In no way do I disregard Dijkstra or his secret service Sheala de Tancarville said. I know that finding Vilgefortz is only a matter of time. However passing over the motif of personal vengeance which seems to fascinate some of you Ill take the liberty of observing that it is not at all certain that Vilgefortz has Ciri.
If its not Vilgefortz then who? She was on the island. None of us as far as I know teleported her away from there. Neither Dijkstra nor any of the kings have her we know that for sure. And her body wasnt found in the ruins of the Tower of Gulls.
Tor Lara Ida Emean said slowly once concealed a very powerful teleportal. Could the girl have escaped Thanedd through that portal?
Yennefer veiled her eyes with her eyelashes and dug her nails into the heads of the sphinxes on the chairs armrests. Keep calm she thought. Just keep calm. She felt Margaritas eyes on her but did not raise her head.
If Ciri entered the teleportal in the Tower of Gulls the rectoress of Aretuza said in a slightly altered voice I fear we can forget our plans and projects. We may never see Ciri again. The now-destroyed portal of Tor Lara was damaged. Its warped. Lethal.
What are we talking about here? Sabrina exploded. In order to uncover the teleportal in the tower in order to see it at all would require fourth-level magic! And the abilities of a grandmaster would be necessary to activate the portal! I dont know if Vilgefortz is capable of that never mind a fifteen-year-old filly. How can you even imagine something like that? Who is this girl in your opinion? What potential does she hold?
Is it so important Stephan Skellen also called Tawny Owl the Coroner of Imperator Emhyr var Emreis said stretching what potential she holds Master Bonhart? Or even if any? Id rather she wasnt around at all. And Im paying you a hundred florins to make my wish come true. If you want examine her–after killing her or before up to you. Either way the fee wont change I give you my solemn word.
And were I to supply her alive?
It still wont.
The man called Bonhart twisted his grey whiskers. He was of immense height but as bony as a skeleton. His other hand rested on his sword the entire time as though he wanted to hide the ornate pommel of the hilt from Skellens eyes.
Am I to bring you her head?
No Tawny Owl said wincing. Why would I want her head? To preserve in honey?
As proof.
Ill take you at your word. You are well known for your reliability Bonhart.
Thank you for the recognition the bounty hunter said and smiled. At the sight of his smile Skellen who had twenty armed men waiting outside the tavern felt a shiver running down his spine. Rarely received although well deserved. I have to bring the barons and the lords Varnhagens the heads of all the Rats I catch or they wont pay. If you have no need of Falkas head you wont I imagine have anything against my adding it to the set.
To claim the other reward? What about your professional ethics?
Honoured sir Bonhart said narrowing his eyes I am not paid for killing but for the service I render by killing. A service Ill be rendering both you and the Varnhagens.
Fair enough Tawny Owl agreed. Do whatever you thinks right. When can I expect you to collect the bounty money?
Soon.
Meaning?
The Rats are heading for the Bandits Trail with plans to winter in the mountains. Ill cut off their route. Twenty days no more.
Are you certain of the route theyre taking?
Theyve been seen near Fen Aspra where they robbed a convoy and two merchants. Theyve been prowling near Tyffi. Then they stopped off at Druigh for one night to dance at a village fair. They finally ended up in Loredo where your Falka hacked a fellow to pieces in such a fashion that theyre still talking about it through chattering teeth. Which is why I asked what there is to this Falka.
Perhaps you and she are very much alike Stephan Skellen mocked. But no forgive me. After all you dont take money for killing but for services rendered. Youre a true craftsman Bonhart a genuine professional. A trade like any other? A job to be done? They pay for it and everyone has to make a living? Eh?
The bounty hunter looked at him long and hard. Until Tawny Owls smirk finally vanished.
Indeed he said. Everyone has to make a living. Some earn money doing what theyve learned. Others do what they have to. But not many craftsmen have been as lucky in life as I am: they pay me for a trade I truly and honestly enjoy. Not even whores can say that.
Yennefer welcomed Philippas suggestion of a break for a bite to eat and to moisten throats dried out by speaking with relief delight and hope. It soon turned out however that her hopes were in vain. Philippa quickly dragged away Margarita–who clearly wanted to talk to Yennefer–to the other end of the room and Triss Merigold who had drawn closer to her was accompanied by Francesca. The she-elf unceremoniously controlled the conversation. Yennefer saw anxiety in Trisss cornflower-blue eyes however and was certain that even without witnesses it would have been futile to ask for help. Triss was undoubtedly already committed heart and soul to the lodge. And doubtlessly sensed that Yennefers loyalty was still wavering.
Triss tried to cheer her up by assuring her that Geralt safe in Brokilon was returning to health thanks to the dryads efforts. As usual she blushed at the mention of his name. He must have pleased her back then Yennefer thought not without malice. She had never known anyone like him before and she wont forget him in a hurry. And a good thing too.
She dismissed the revelations with an apparently indifferent shrug of her shoulders. She wasnt concerned by the fact that neither Triss nor Francesca believed her indifference. She wanted to be alone and wanted them to see that.
They did just that.
She stood at the far end of the food table devoting herself to oysters. She ate cautiously still in pain from her compression. She was reluctant to drink wine not knowing how she might react.
Yennefer?
She turned around. Fringilla Vigo smiled faintly looking down at the short knife Yennefer was gripping tightly.
I can see and sense she said that youd rather prise me open than that oyster. Still no love lost?
The lodge Yennefer replied coolly demands mutual loyalty. Friendship is not compulsory.
It isnt and shouldnt be the Nilfgaardian sorceress said and looked around the chamber. Friendship is either the result of a lengthy process or is spontaneous.
The same goes for enmity Yennefer said opening the oyster and swallowing the contents along with some seawater. Occasionally one happens to see another person for only a split second right before going blind and one takes a dislike to them instantly.
Oh enmity is considerably more complicated Fringilla said squinting. Imagine someone you dont know at all standing at the top of a hill and ripping a friend of yours to shreds in front of your eyes. You neither saw them nor know them at all but you still dont like them.
So it goes Yennefer said shrugging. Fate has a way of playing tricks on you.
Fate Fringilla said quietly is unpredictable indeed like a mischievous child. Friends sometimes turn their backs on us while an enemy comes in useful. You can for example talk to them face to face. No one tries to interfere no one interrupts or eavesdrops. Everyone wonders what the two enemies could possibly be talking about. About nothing important. Why theyre mouthing platitudes and twisting the occasional barb.
No doubt Yennefer said nodding thats what everyone thinks. And theyre absolutely right.
Which means itll be even easier Fringilla said quite relaxed to bring up a particularly important and remarkable matter.
What matter would that be?
That of the escape attempt youre planning.
Yennefer who was opening another oyster almost cut her finger. She looked around furtively and then glanced at the Nilfgaardian from under her eyelashes. Fringilla Vigo smiled slightly.
Be so kind as to lend me the knife. To open an oyster. Your oysters are excellent. Its not easy for us to get such good ones in the south. Particularly not now during the wartime blockade… A blockade is a very bad thing isnt it?
Yennefer gave a slight cough.
Ive noticed Fringilla said swallowing the oyster and reaching for another. Yes Philippas looking at us. Assire too probably worrying about my loyalty to the lodge. My endangered loyalty. Shes liable to think Ill yield to sympathy. Let us see… Your sweetheart was seriously injured. The girl you treat as a daughter has disappeared is possibly being imprisoned… perhaps her lifes in danger. Or perhaps shell just be played as a card in a rigged game? I swear I couldnt stand it. Id flee at once. Please take the knife back. Thats enough oysters I have to watch my figure.
A blockade as you have deigned to observe Yennefer whispered looking into the Nilfgaardian sorceresss eyes is a very bad thing. Simply beastly. It doesnt allow one to do what one wants. But a blockade can be overcome if one has… the means. Which I dont.
Do you expect me to give the means to you? the Nilfgaardian asked examining the rough shell of the oyster which she was still holding. Oh no not a chance. Im loyal to the lodge and the lodge naturally doesnt wish you to hurry to the aid of your loved ones. Furthermore Im your enemy. How could you forget that Yennefer?
Indeed. How could I?
I would warn a friend Fringilla said quietly that even if she were in possession of the components for teleportation spells she wouldnt be able to break the blockade undetected. An operation of that kind demands time and is too conspicuous. An unobtrusive but energetic attractor is a little better. I repeat: a little better. Teleportation using an improvised attractor as you are no doubt aware is very risky. I would try to dissuade a friend from taking such a risk. But you arent a friend.
Fringilla spilt a sprinkling of seawater from the shell she was holding onto the table.
And on that note well end our banal conversation she said. The lodge demands mutual loyalty from us. Friendship fortunately isnt compulsory.
She teleported Francesca Findabair stated coldly and unemotionally when the confusion caused by Yennefers disappearance had calmed down. Theres nothing to get het up about ladies. And theres nothing we can do about it now. Shes too far away. Its my mistake. I suspected her obsidian star masked the echo of spells—
How did she bloody do it? Philippa yelled. She could muffle an echo that isnt difficult. But how did she manage to open the portal? Montecalvo has a blockade!
Ive never liked her Sheala de Tancarville said shrugging her shoulders. Ive never approved of her lifestyle. But Ive never questioned her abilities.
Shell tell them everything! Sabrina Glevissig yelled. Everything about the lodge! Shell fly straight to—
Nonsense Triss Merigold interrupted animatedly looking at Francesca and Ida Emean. Yennefer wont betray us. She didnt escape to betray us.
Triss is right Margarita Laux-Antille added backing her up. I know why she escaped and who she wants to rescue. Ive seen them she and Ciri together. And I understand.
But I dont understand any of this! Sabrina yelled and everything became heated again.
Assire var Anahid leant towards her friend.
I wont ask why you did it she whispered. I wont ask how you did it. Ill only ask: where is she headed?
Fringilla Vigo smiled faintly stroking the carved head of the sphinx on the chairs armrest with her fingers.
And how could I possibly know she whispered back which coast these oysters came from?
Ithlina actually Ithlinne Aegli: daughter of Aevenien the legendary elven healer astrologist and soothsayer famous for her predictions and prophecies of which Aen Ithlinnespeath Ithlinas Prophecy is the best known. It has been written down many times and published in numerous forms. The Prophecy enjoyed great popularity at certain moments and the commentaries clues and clarifications appended to it adapted the text to contemporary events which strengthened convictions about its great clairvoyance. In particular it is believed I. predicted the Northern Wars (1239–1268) the Great Plagues (1268 1272 and 1294) the bloody War of the Two Unicorns (1309–1318) and the Haak Invasion (1350). I. was also supposed to have prophesied the climatic changes observed from the end of the thirteenth century known as the Great Frost which superstition always claimed was a sign of the end of the world and linked to the prophesied coming of the Destroyer (q.v.). This passage from I.s Prophecy gave rise to the infamous witch hunts (1272–76) and contributed to the deaths of many women and unfortunate girls mistaken for the incarnation of the Destroyer. Today I. is regarded by many scholars as a legendary figure and her prophecies as very recently fabricated apocrypha and a cunning literary fraud.
Effenberg and Talbot
Encyclopaedia Maxima Mundi Volume X
CHAPTER SEVEN
The children gathered in a ring around the wandering storyteller Stribog showed their disapproval by making a dreadful riotous uproar. Finally Connor the blacksmiths son the oldest strongest and bravest of the children and also the one who brought the storyteller a pot full of cabbage soup and potatoes sprinkled with scraps of fried bacon stepped forward as the spokesman and exponent of the general opinion.
Hows that? he yelled. What do you mean thats your lot? Is it fair to end the tale there? To leave us hungry for more? We want to know what happened next! We cant wait till you visit our village again for it might be in six months or a whole year! Go on with the story!
The suns gone down the old man replied. Its time for bed young uns. When you start to yawn and grumble over your chores tomorrow what will your parents say? I know what theyll say: Old Stribog was telling them tales till past midnight wearying the childrens heads with songs and didnt let them get to bed. So when he wends his way to the village again dont give him nothing; no kasha no dumplings no bacon. Just drive him off the old gimmer because nothing comes from his tales but woe and trouble— 
They wont say that! the children all shouted. Tell us more! Pleeease!
Mmm the old man mumbled looking at the sun disappearing behind the treetops on the far bank of the Yaruga. Very well then. But heres the bargain: one of yous to hurry over to the cottage and fetch some buttermilk for me to moisten my throat. The rest of you meanwhile are to decide whose story Ill tell for I shant tell everyones tale today even were I to spin yarns till morning. You have to decide: who do I tell of now and who another time.
The children began to yell again each trying to outshout the others.
Silence! Stribog roared brandishing his stick. I told you to choose not shriek like jays: skaak-skaak-skaak! Whatll it be? Whose story shall I tell?
Yennefers Nimue squeaked. She was the youngest in the audience nicknamed Squirt owing to her height and was stroking a kitten that was asleep on her lap. Tell us what happened to the sorceress afterwards. How she used magic to flee from the cov-cov-coven on Bald Mountain to rescue Ciri. Id love to hear that. I want to be a sorceress when I grow up!
No chance! shouted Bronik the millers son. Wipe your nose first Squirt. They dont take snot-noses for sorcerers apprentices! And you old man dont talk about Yennefer but about Ciri and the Rats when they went a-robbing and beat up—
Quiet Connor said glum and pensive. Youre all stupid and thats that. If were to hear one thing more tonight let there be some order. Tell us about the Witcher and his band when the company set off from the Yaruga—
I want to hear about Yennefer Nimue squealed.
Me too Orla her elder sister joined in. I want to hear about her love for the Witcher. How they doted on each other. But be sure its a happy ending! Nowt about fighting oh no!
Quiet you silly thing who cares about love? We want war and fighting!
And the Witchers sword!
No Ciri and the Rats!
Shut your traps Connor said and looked around fiercely. Or Ill get a stick and give you a thrashing you little snots! I said: let there be some order. Let him carry on about the Witcher when he was travelling with Dandelion and Milva—
Yes! Nimue squealed again. I want to hear about Milva about Milva! Because if the sorceresses dont take me Im going to be an archer!
So weve decided Connor said. Look at him nodding nose dipping like a corncrakes… Hey old man! Wake up! Tell us about the Witcher about Geralt the Witcher I mean. When he formed his fellowship on the bank of the Yaruga.
But first Bronik interrupted to salve our curiosity tell us a little about the others. About what happened to them. Then itll be easier for us to wait till you come back and continue the story. Just a little about Yennefer and Ciri. Please.
Yennefer–Stribog giggled–flew from the enchanted castle which was called Bald Mountain using a spell. And she plopped straight into the ocean. Into the rough seas among cruel rocks. But dont be afeared it was a trifle for the enchantress. She didnt drown. She landed up on the Skellige Islands and found allies there. For you must know that a great fury arose in her against the Wizard Vilgefortz. Convinced he had kidnapped Ciri she vowed to track him down exact a terrible vengeance and free Ciri. And thats that. Ill tell you more another time.
And Ciri?
Ciri was still prowling with the Rats calling herself Falka. She had gained a taste for the robbers life. For though no one knew it then there was fury and cruelty in that girl. The worst of everything that hides in a person emerged from her and slowly got the upper hand. Oh the witchers of Kaer Morhen made a great mistake by teaching her how to kill! And Ciri herself–dealing out death–didnt even suspect that the Grim Reaper was hot on her trail. For the terrible Bonhart was tracking her hunting her. The meeting of these two Bonhart and Ciri was meant to be. But I shall recount their tale another time. For tonight you shall hear the tale of the Witcher.
The children calmed down and crowded around the old man in a tight circle. They listened. Night was falling. The hemp shrubs the raspberry bushes and hollyhocks growing near the cottage–friendly during the day–were suddenly transformed into an extraordinary sinister forest. What was rustling there? Was it a mouse or a terrible fiery-eyed elf? Or perhaps a striga or a witch hungry for childrens flesh? Was it an ox stamping in the cowshed or the hooves of cruel invaders warhorses crossing the Yaruga as they had a century before? Was that a nightjar flitting above the thatched roof or perhaps a vampire thirsty for blood? Or perhaps a beautiful sorceress flying towards the distant sea with the aid of a magic spell?
Geralt the Witcher the storyteller began set out with his company towards the bogs and forests of Angren. And you must know that in those days there were truly wild forests in Angren oh my not like now there arent any forests like that left unless in Brokilon… The company trekked eastwards up the Yaruga towards the wildernesses of the Black Forest. Things went well at first but later oh my… youll learn what happened later…
The tale of long-past forgotten times unravelled and flowed. And the children listened.
The Witcher sat on a log at the top of a cliff from which unfolded a view over the wetlands and reed beds lining the bank of the Yaruga. The sun was sinking. Cranes soared up from the marshes whooping flying in a skein.
Everythings gone to pot the Witcher thought looking at the ruins of a woodmans shack and the thin ribbon of smoke rising from Milvas campfire. Everythings fallen through. And it was going so well. My companions were strange but at least they stood by me. We had a goal to achieve; close at hand realistic defined. Eastwards through Angren towards Caed Dhu. It was going pretty well. But it had to get fucked up. Was it bad luck or fate?
The cranes sounded their bugle call.
Emiel Regis Rohellec Terzieff-Godefroy led the way riding a Nilfgaardian bay captured by the Witcher near Armeria. The horse although at first somewhat tetchy with the vampire and his herby smell quickly became accustomed to him and didnt cause any more problems than Roach who was walking alongside and was capable of bucking wildly if stung by a horsefly. Dandelion followed behind Regis and Geralt on Pegasus with a bandaged head and a warlike mien. As he rode the poet composed a heroic ballad in whose melody and rhymes could be heard his recollections of their recent adventures. The song clearly implied that the author and performer had been the bravest of the brave during the adventures. Milva and Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach brought up the rear. Cahir was riding his recovered chestnut pulling the grey laden with some of their modest accoutrement.
They finally left the riverside marshes heading towards higher and drier hilly terrain from which they could see the sparkling ribbon of the Great Yaruga to the south and to the north the high rocky approaches to the distant Mahakam massif. The weather was splendid the sun was warm and the mosquitoes had stopped biting and buzzing around their ears. Their boots and trousers had dried out. On the sunny slope brambles were black with fruit and the horses found grass to eat. The streams tumbling down from the hills flowed with crystal-clear water and were full of trout. When night fell they were able to make a fire and even lie beside it. In short everything was wonderful and their moods ought to have improved right away. But they didnt. The reason why became apparent at one of the first camps.
Wait a moment Geralt the poet began looking around and clearing his throat. Dont rush back to the camp. Milva and I would like to talk to you in private. Its about… you know… Regis.
Ah the Witcher said laying a handful of brushwood on the ground. So now youre afraid? Its a bit late for that.
Stop that Dandelion said with a grimace. Weve accepted him as a companion; hes offered to help us search for Ciri. He saved my neck from the noose which I shall never forget. But hells bells we are feeling something like fear. Does that surprise you? Youve spent your entire life hunting and killing his like.
I did not kill him. And Im not planning to. Does that declaration suffice? If it doesnt even though my hearts brimming with sorrow for you I cant cure you of your anxieties. Paradoxically Regis is the only one among us capable of curing anything.
Stop that the troubadour repeated annoyed. You arent talking to Yennefer; you can drop the tortuous eloquence. Give us a simple answer to a simple question.
Then ask it. Without any tortuous eloquence.
Regis is a vampire. Its no secret what vampires feed on. What will happen when he gets seriously hungry? Yes yes we saw him eating fish soup and since then hes been eating and drinking with us as normal as anyone. But… will he be able to control his craving… Geralt do I have to spell it out to you?
He controlled his blood lust when gore was pouring from your head. He didnt even lick his fingers after hed finished applying the dressing. And during the full moon when wed been drinking his mandrake moonshine and were sleeping in his shack he had the perfect opportunity to get his hands on us. Have you checked for puncture marks on your swanlike neck?
Dont take the piss Witcher Milva growled. You know more about vampires than we do. Youre mocking Dandelion so tell me. I was raised in the forest I didnt go to school. Im ignorant. But its no fault of mine. Its not right to mock. I–Im ashamed to say–am also a bit afraid of… Regis.
Not unreasonably Geralt said nodding. Hes a so-called higher vampire. Hes extremely dangerous. Were he our enemy Id be afraid of him too. But bloody hell for reasons unknown to me hes our companion. Right now hes leading us to Caed Dhu to the druids who may be able to help me get information about Ciri. Im desperate so I want to seize the chance and certainly not give up on it. Which is why Ive agreed to his vampiric company.
Only because of that?
No he answered with a trace of reluctance. Then he finally decided to be frank. Not just that. He… he behaves decently. He didnt hesitate to act during that girls trial at the camp by the Chotla. Although he knew it would unmask him.
He took that red-hot horseshoe from the fire Dandelion recalled. Why he held it in his hand for a good few seconds without even flinching. None of us would be able to repeat that trick; not even with a roast potato.
Hes invulnerable to fire.
What else is he capable of?
He can become invisible if he wishes. He can bewitch with his gaze and put someone in a deep sleep. He did that to the guards in Vissegerds camp. He can assume the form of a bat and fly. I presume he can only do those things at night during a full moon but I could be wrong. Hes already surprised me a few times so he might still have something up his sleeve. I suspect hes quite remarkable even among vampires. He imitates humans perfectly and has done so for years. He baffles horses and dogs–which can sense his true nature–using the smell of the herbs he keeps with him at all times. Though my medallion doesnt react to him either and it ought to. I tell you; he defies easy classification. Talk to him if you want to know more. Hes our companion. There should be nothing left unsaid between us particularly not mutual mistrust or fear. Lets get back to the camp. Help me with this brushwood.
Geralt?
Yes Dandelion.
If… and Im asking purely theoretically… If…
I dont know the Witcher replied honestly and frankly. I dont know if Id be capable of killing him. I truly would prefer not to be forced to try.
Dandelion took the Witchers advice to heart deciding to clear up the uncertainty and dispel their doubts. He began as soon as they set off. With his usual tact.
Milva! he suddenly called as they were riding sneaking a glance at the vampire. Why dont you ride on ahead with your bow and bring down a fawn or wild boar. Ive had enough of damned blackberries and mushrooms fish and mussels. I fancy eating a hunk of real meat for a change. How about you Regis?
I beg your pardon? the vampire said lifting his head from the horses neck.
Meat! the poet repeated emphatically. Im trying to persuade Milva to go hunting. Fancy some fresh meat?
Yes I do.
And blood. Would you like some fresh blood?
Blood? Regis asked swallowing. No. Ill decline the blood. But if you have a taste for some feel free.
Geralt Milva and Cahir observed an awkward sepulchral silence.
I know what this is about Dandelion Regis said slowly. And let me reassure you. Im a vampire but I dont drink blood.
The silence became as heavy as lead. But Dandelion wouldnt have been Dandelion if he had remained silent.
You must have misunderstood me he said seemingly light-heartedly. I didnt mean…
I dont drink blood Regis interrupted. Havent for many years. I gave it up.
What do you mean gave it up?
Just that.
I really dont understand…
Forgive me. Its a personal matter.
But…
Dandelion the Witcher burst out turning around in the saddle. Regis just told you to fuck off. He just said it more politely. Be so good as to shut your trap.
However the seeds of anxiety and doubts that had been sown now germinated and sprouted. When they stopped for the night the ambience was still heavy and tense which even Milva shooting down a plump barnacle goose by the river couldnt relieve. They covered the catch in clay roasted and ate it gnawing even the tiniest bones clean. They had sated their hunger but the anxiety remained. The conversation was awkward despite Dandelions titanic efforts. The poets chatter became a monologue so obviously apparent that even he finally noticed it and stopped talking. Only the sound of the horses crunching their hay disturbed the deathly silence around the campfire.
In spite of the late hour no one seemed to be getting ready for bed. Milva was boiling water in a pot above the fire and straightening the crumpled fletchings of her arrows in the steam. Cahir was repairing a torn boot buckle. Geralt was whittling a piece of wood. And Regis swept his eyes over all of them in turn.
Very well he said at last. I see it is inevitable. It would appear I ought to have explained a few things to you long ago…
No one expects it of you Geralt said. He threw the stick he had been lengthily and enthusiastically carving into the fire and looked up. I dont need explanations. Im the old-fashioned type. When I hold my hand out to someone and accept him as a comrade it means more to me than a contract signed in the presence of a notary.
Im old-fashioned too Cahir said still bent over his boot.
I dont know any other custom Milva said drily placing another arrow in the steam rising up from the pot.
Dont worry about Dandelions chatter the Witcher added. He cant help it. And you dont have to confide in us or explain anything. We havent confided in you either.
I nonetheless think–the vampire smiled faintly–that youd like to hear what I have to say even though no ones forcing you to. I feel the need for openness towards the individuals I extend a hand to and accept as my comrades.
This time no one said anything.
I ought to begin by saying Regis said a moment later that all fears linked to my vampiric nature are groundless. I wont attack anybody nor will I creep around at night trying to sink my teeth into somebodys neck. And this does not merely concern my comrades to whom my relationship is no less old-fashioned than theirs is to me. I dont touch blood. Not at all and never. I stopped drinking it when it became a problem for me. A serious problem which I had difficulty solving.
In fact the problem arose and acquired negative characteristics in true textbook style he continued a moment later. Even during my youth I enjoyed… er… the pleasures of good company in which respect I was no different to the majority of my peers. You know what its like; you were young too. With humans however there exists a system of rules and restrictions: parental authority guardians superiors and elders–morals ultimately. We have nothing like that. Youngsters have complete freedom and exploit it. They create their own patterns of behaviour. Stupid ones you understand. Its real youthful foolishness. Dont fancy a drink? And you call yourself a vampire? He doesnt drink? Dont invite him hell spoil the party! I didnt want to spoil the party and the thought of losing social approval terrified me. So I partied. Revelries and frolics shindigs and booze-ups; every full moon wed fly to a village and drink from anyone we found. The foulest the worst class of… er… fluid. It made no difference to us whose it was as long as there was… er… haemoglobin… It cant be a party without blood after all! And I was terribly shy with vampire girls too until Id had a drop.
Regis fell silent lost in thought. No one responded. Geralt felt a terrible urge to have a drink himself.
It got rowdier and rowdier the vampire continued. And worse and worse as time went on. Occasionally I went on such benders that I didnt return to the crypt for three or four nights in a row. A tiny amount of fluid and I lost control which of course didnt stop me from continuing the party. My friends? Well you know what theyre like. Some of them tried to make me see reason so I took offence. Others were a bad influence and dragged me out of the crypt to revels. Why they even set me up with… er… playthings. And they enjoyed themselves at my expense.
Milva still busy restoring her arrows flattened fletchings murmured angrily. Cahir had finished repairing his boot and seemed to be asleep.
Later on Regis continued more alarming symptoms appeared. Parties and company began to play an absolutely secondary role. I noticed I could manage without them. Blood was all I needed was all that mattered even when it was…
Just you and your shadow? Dandelion interjected.
Worse than that Regis answered calmly. I dont even cast one.
He was silent for a while.
Then I met a special vampire girl. It might have been–I think it was–serious. I settled down. But not for long. She left me. So I began to double my intake. Despair and grief as you know are perfect excuses. Everyone thinks they understand. Even I thought I understood. But I was merely applying theory to practice. Am I boring you? Ill try to make it short. I finally began to do absolutely unacceptable things the kind of things no vampire does. I flew under the influence. One night the boys sent me to the village to fetch some blood and I missed my target: a girl who was walking to the well. I smashed straight into the well at top speed… The villagers almost beat me to death but fortunately they didnt know how to go about it… They punctured me with stakes chopped my head off poured holy water all over me and buried me. Can you imagine how I felt when I woke up?
We can Milva said examining an arrow. Everyone looked at her strangely. The archer coughed and looked away. Regis smiled faintly.
I wont be long now he said. In the grave I had plenty of time to rethink things…
Plenty? Geralt asked. How much?
Regis looked at him.
Professional curiosity? Around fifty years. After Id regenerated I decided to pull myself together. It wasnt easy but I did it. And I havent drunk since.
Not at all? Dandelion said and stuttered. But his curiosity got the better of him. Not at all? Never? But…?
Dandelion Geralt said slightly raising his eyebrows. Get a grip and think. In silence.
I beg your pardon the poet grunted.
Dont apologise the vampire said placatingly. And Geralt dont chasten him. I understand his curiosity. I–by which I mean I and my myth–personify all his human fears. One cannot expect a human to rid himself of them. Fear plays a no less important role in the human psyche than all the other emotions. A psyche without fears would be crippled.
But Dandelion said regaining his poise you dont frighten me. Does that make me a cripple?
For a moment Geralt expected Regis to show his fangs and cure Dandelion of his supposed disability but he was wrong. The vampire wasnt inclined towards theatrical gestures.
I was talking about fears deeply lodged in the consciousness and the subconscious he explained calmly. Please dont be hurt by this metaphor but a crow isnt afraid of a hat and coat hung on a stick after it has overcome that fear and alighted on them. But when the wind jerks the scarecrow the bird flees.
The crows behaviour might be seen as a struggle for life Cahir observed from the darkness.
Struggle schmuggle. Milva snorted. The crow isnt afraid of the scarecrow. Its afraid of men because men throw stones and shoot at it.
A struggle for life. Geralt nodded. But in human–not corvine–terms. Thank you for the explanation Regis we accept it wholeheartedly. But dont go rooting about in the depths of the human subconscious. Milvas right. The reasons people react in panic-stricken horror at the sight of a thirsty vampire arent irrational they are a result of the will to survive.
Thus speaks an expert the vampire said bowing slightly towards him. An expert whose professional pride would not allow him to take money for fighting imaginary fears. The self-respecting witcher who only hires himself out to fight real unequivocally dangerous evil. This professional will probably want to explain why a vampire is a greater threat than a dragon or a wolf. They have fangs too dont forget.
Perhaps because the latter two use their fangs to stave off hunger or in self-defence but never for fun or for breaking the ice or overcoming shyness towards the opposite sex.
People know nothing about that riposted Regis. You have known it for some time but the rest of our company have only just discovered the truth. The remaining majority are deeply convinced that vampires do not drink for fun but feed on blood and nothing but blood. Needless to say human blood. Blood is a life-giving fluid; its loss results in the weakening of the body the seeping away of a vital force. You reason thus: a creature that spills our blood is our deadly enemy. And a creature that attacks us for our blood because it lives on it is doubly evil. It grows in vital force at the expense of ours. For its species to thrive ours must fade away. Ultimately a creature like that is repellent to you humans for although you are aware of bloods life-giving qualities it is disgusting to you. Would any of you drink blood? I doubt it. And there are people who grow weak or even faint at the sight of blood. In some societies women are considered unclean for a few days every month and they are isolated—
Among savages perhaps Cahir interrupted. And I think only Nordlings grow faint at the sight of blood.
Weve strayed the Witcher said looking up. Weve deviated from a straight path into a tangle of dubious philosophy. Do you think Regis that it would make a difference to humans were they to know you dont treat them as prey but as a watering hole? Where do you see the irrationality of fears here? Vampires drink human blood; that particular fact cannot be challenged. A human treated by a vampire as a demijohn of vodka loses his strength thats also clear. A totally drained human–so to speak–loses his vitality definitively. He dies. Forgive me but the fear of death cant be lumped together with an aversion to blood. Menstrual or otherwise.
Your talks so clever it makes my head spin Milva snorted. And all your wisdom comes down to whats under a womans skirt. Woeful philosophers.
Lets cast aside the symbolism of blood for a moment Regis said. For here the myths really do have certain grounds in facts. Lets focus on those universally accepted myths with no grounds in fact. After all everyone knows that if someone is bitten by a vampire and survives they must become a vampire themselves. Right?
Right Dandelion said. Theres even a ballad—
Do you understand basic arithmetic?
Ive studied all seven liberal arts and was awarded a degree summa cum laude.
After the Conjunction of the Spheres there remained approximately one thousand two hundred higher vampires in your world. The number of teetotallers–because there is a considerable number of them–balances the number who drink excessively as I did in my day. Generally the statistically average vampire drinks during every full moon for the full moon is a holy day for us which we usually… er… celebrate with a drink. Applying the matter to the human calendar and assuming there are twelve full moons a year gives us the theoretical sum of fourteen thousand four hundred humans bitten annually. Since the Conjunction–once again calculating according to your reckoning–one thousand five hundred years have passed. A simple calculation will show that at the present moment twenty-one million six hundred thousand vampires ought to exist in the world. If that figure is augmented by exponential growth…
Thatll do. Dandelion sighed. I dont have an abacus but I can imagine the number. Actually I cant imagine it and youre saying that infection from a bite is nonsense and a fabrication.
Thank you Regis said bowing. Lets move on to the next myth which states that a vampire is a human being who has died–but not completely. He doesnt rot or crumble to dust in the grave. He lies there as fresh as a daisy and ruddy-faced ready to go forth and bite a victim. Where does that myth come from if not from your subconscious and irrational aversion to your dearly departed? You surround the dead with veneration and memory you dream of immortality and in your myths and legends theres always someone being resurrected conquering death. But were your esteemed late great-grandfather really to suddenly rise from the grave and order a beer panic would ensue. And it doesnt surprise me. Organic matter in which the vital processes have ceased succumbs to degradation which manifests itself very unpleasantly. The corpse stinks and dissolves into slime. The immortal soul an indispensable element of your myths abandons the stinking carcass in disgust and spirits away forgive the pun. The soul is pure and one can easily venerate it. But then you invented a revolting kind of spirit which doesnt soar doesnt abandon the cadaver why it doesnt even stink. Thats repulsive and unnatural! For you the living dead is the most revolting of revolting anomalies. Some moron even coined the term the undead which youre ever so keen to bestow on us.
Humans Geralt said smiling slightly are a primitive and superstitious race. They find it difficult to fully understand and appropriately name a creature that resurrects even though its had stakes pushed through it had its head removed and been buried in the ground for fifty years.
Yes indeed said the vampire impervious to the derision. Your mutated race is capable of regenerating its fingernails toenails hair and epidermis but is unable to accept the fact that other races are more advanced in that respect. That inability is not the result of your primitiveness. Quite the opposite: its a result of egotism and a conviction in your own perfection. Anything that is more perfect than you must be a repulsive aberration. And repulsive aberrations are consigned to myths for sociological reasons.
I dont understand fuck all Milva announced calmly brushing the hair from her forehead with an arrow tip. I hear youre talking about fairy-tales and even I know fairy-tales though Im a foolish wench from the forest. So it astonishes me that you arent afraid of the sun Regis. In fairy-tales sunlight burns a vampire to ash. Should I lump it together with the other fairy-tales?
Of course you should Regis confirmed. You believe a vampire is only dangerous at night that the first rays of the sun turn him into ash. At the root of this myth invented around primeval campfires lies your heliophilia by which I mean love of warmth; the circadian rhythm which relies upon diurnal activity. For you the night is cold dark sinister menacing and full of danger. The sunrise however represents another victory in the fight for life a new day the continuation of existence. Sunlight carries with it light and the sun; and the suns rays which are invigorating for you bring with them the destruction of hostile monsters. A vampire turns to ash a troll succumbs to petrifaction a werewolf turns back into a human and a goblin flees covering his eyes. Nocturnal predators return to their lairs and cease to be a threat. The world belongs to you until sunset. I repeat and stress: this myth arose around ancient campfires. Today it is only a myth for now you light and heat your dwelling places. Even though you are still governed by the solar rhythm you have managed to appropriate the night. We higher vampires have also moved some way from our primeval crypts. We have appropriated the day. The analogy is complete. Does this explanation satisfy you my dear Milva?
Not in the slightest the archer replied throwing the arrow away. But I think Ive got it. Im learning. Ill be learned one day. Sociolation petrificology werewolfation crap-ology. In schools they lecture and birch you. Its more pleasant learning with you lot. My head hurts a bit but my arse is still in one piece.
One thing is beyond question and is easy to observe Dandelion said. The suns rays dont turn you into ash Regis. The suns warmth has as much effect on you as that red-hot horseshoe you so nimbly removed from the fire with your bare hands. Returning however to your analogies for us humans the day will always remain the natural time for activity and the night the natural time for rest. That is our physical structure. During the day for example we see better than at night. Except Geralt who sees just as well at all times but hes a mutant. Was it also a question of mutation among vampires?
One could call it that Regis agreed. Although I would argue that when mutation is spread over a sufficiently long period it ceases to be mutation and becomes evolution. But what you said about physical structure is apt. Adapting to sunlight was an unpleasant necessity for us. In order to survive we had to become like humans in that respect. Mimicry Id call it. Which had its consequences. To use a metaphor: we lay down in the sick mans bed.
I beg your pardon?
There are reasons to believe that sunlight is lethal in the long run. Theres a theory that in about five thousand years at a conservative estimate this world will only be inhabited by lunar creatures which are active at night.
Im glad I wont be around that long. Cahir sighed then yawned widely. I dont know about you but the intensive diurnal activity is reminding me of the need for nocturnal sleep.
Me too the Witcher said stretching. And there are only a few hours left until the dawning of the murderous sun. But before sleep overcomes us… Regis in the name of science and the spread of knowledge puncture some other myths about vampirism. Because I bet youve still got at least one.
Indeed. The vampire nodded. I have one more. Its the last but in no sense any less important. It is the myth behind your sexual phobias.
Cahir snorted softly.
I left this myth until the end Regis said looking him up and down. I would have tactfully passed over it but since Geralt has challenged me I wont spare you. Humans are most powerfully influenced by fears with a sexual origin. The virgin fainting in the embrace of a vampire who drinks her blood. The young man falling prey to the vile practices of a female vampire running her lips over his body. Thats how you imagine it. Oral rape. Vampires paralyse their victims with fear and force them to have oral sex. Or rather a revolting parody of oral sex. And there is something disgusting about sex like that which after all rules out procreation.
Speak for yourself the Witcher muttered.
An act crowned not by procreation but by sensual delight and death Regis continued. You have turned it into a baleful myth. You unconsciously dream of something like it but shy away from offering it to your lovers. So its done for you by the mythological vampire who as a result swells to become a fascinating symbol of evil.
Didnt I say it? Milva yelled as soon as Dandelion had finished explaining to her what Regis had been talking about. Its all they ever have on their minds! It starts off brainy but always comes back to humping!
The distant trumpeting of cranes slowly died away.
The next day the Witcher recalled we set off in much better humour. And then utterly unexpectedly war caught up with us again.
They travelled through a practically deserted and strategically unimportant country covered in huge dense forests unappealing to invaders. Although Nilfgaard was close at last and they were only separated from the imperial lands by the broad waters of the Great Yaruga it was difficult terrain to cover. Their astonishment was all the greater because of that.
War appeared in a less spectacular way than it had in Brugge and Sodden where the horizon had glowed with fires at night and during the day columns of black smoke had slashed the blue sky. It was not so picturesque here in Angren. It was much worse. They suddenly saw a murder of crows circling over the forest with a horrible cawing and soon after they happened upon some corpses. Although the bodies had been stripped of their clothing and were impossible to identify they bore the infallible and clear marks of violent death. Those people had been killed in combat. And not just killed. Most of the corpses were lying in the undergrowth but some cruelly mutilated hung from trees by their arms or legs lay sprawled on burnt-out pyres or were impaled on stakes. And they stank. The whole of Angren had suddenly begun to reek with the monstrous repulsive stench of barbarity.
It wasnt long before they had to hide in ravines and thick undergrowth for to their left and right and in front and behind them the earth shook with cavalry horses hooves and more and more units passed their hideout stirring up dust.
Once again Dandelion said shaking his head once again we dont know whos fighting who and why. Once again we dont know whos behind us or whos ahead of us or what direction theyre headed. Whos attacking and whos retreating. The pox take it all. I dont know if Ive ever told you but I see it like this: war is no different to a whorehouse with a fire raging through it—
You have Geralt interrupted. A hundred times.
What are they fighting over? the poet asked spitting violently. Juniper bushes and sand? I mean this exquisite country hasnt got anything else to offer.
There were elves among the bodies in the bushes Milva said. Scoiatael commandos march this way they always have. This is the route volunteers from Dol Blathanna and the Blue Mountains take when they head for Temeria. Someone wants to block their path. Thats what I think.
Its likely Regis admitted that the Temerian Army would try to ambush the Squirrels here. But Id say there are too many soldiers in the area. I surmise the Nilfgaardians have crossed the Yaruga.
I surmise the same the Witcher said grimacing a little as he looked at Cahirs stony countenance. The bodies we saw this morning carried the marks of Nilfgaardian combat methods.
Theyre all as bad as each other Milva snapped unexpectedly taking the side of the young Nilfgaardian. And dont look daggers at Cahir because now youre bound by the same bizarre fate. He dies if he falls into the Blacks clutches and you escaped a Temerian noose a while back. So its no use trying to find out which army is in front of us and which behind who are our comrades who are our enemies whos good and whos evil. Now theyre all our common foes no matter what colours theyre wearing.
Youre right.
Strange Dandelion said when the next day they had to hide in another ravine and wait for another cavalcade to pass. The army are rumbling over the hills and yet woodmen are felling trees by the Yaruga as if nothing was happening. Can you hear it?
Perhaps they arent woodmen Cahir wondered. Perhaps its the army and theyre sappers.
No theyre woodmen Regis said. Its clear nothing is capable of interrupting the mining of Angren gold.
What gold?
Take a closer look at those trees the vampire said once again assuming the tone of an all-knowing patronising sage instructing mere mortals or the simple-minded. He often acquired that tone which Geralt found somewhat irritating. Those trees Regis repeated are cedars sycamores and Angren pines. Very valuable material. There are timber ports all around here from which logs are floated downstream. Theyre felling trees everywhere and axes are thudding away day and night. The war we can see and hear is beginning to make sense. Nilfgaard as you know has captured the mouth of the Yaruga Cintra and Verden as well as Upper Sodden. At this moment probably also Brugge and part of Lower Sodden. That means that the timber being floated from Angren is already supplying the imperial sawmills and shipyards. The northern kingdoms are trying to halt the process while the Nilfgaardians on the contrary want to fell and float as much as possible.
And we as usual have found ourselves in a tight spot Dandelion said nodding. Seeing as we have to get to Caed Dhu right through the very centre of Angren and this timber war. Isnt there another bloody way?
I asked Regis the same question the Witcher recalled staring at the sun setting over the Yaruga as soon as the thudding of hooves had faded into the distance things had calmed down and we were finally able to continue our journey.
Another way to Caed Dhu? the vampire pondered. Which avoids the hills and keeps out of the soldiers way? Indeed there is such a way. Not very comfortable and not very safe. And its longer too. But I guarantee we wont meet any soldiers there.
Go on.
We can turn south and try to get across a low point in one of the Yarugas meanders. Across Ysgith. Do you know Ysgith Witcher?
Yes.
Have you ever ridden through those forests?
Of course.
The calm in your voice the vampire said clearing his throat would seem to signify you accept the idea. Well there are five of us including a witcher a warrior and an archer. Experience two swords and a bow. Too little to take on a Nilfgaardian raiding party but it ought to be sufficient for Ysgith.
Ysgith the Witcher thought. More than thirty square miles of bogs and mud dotted with tarns. And murky forests full of weird trees dividing up the bogs. Some have trunks covered in scales. At the base theyre as bulbous as onions thinning towards the top ending in dense flat crowns. Others are low and misshapen crouching on piles of roots twisted like octopuses with beards of moss and shrivelled bog lichen hanging on their bare branches. Those beards sway not from the wind though but from poisonous swamp gas. Ysgith means mud hole. Stink hole would be more appropriate.
And the mud and bogs the tarns and lakes overgrown with duckweed and pondweed teem with life. Ysgith isnt just inhabited by beavers frogs tortoises and water birds. It is swarming with much more dangerous creatures armed with pincers tentacles and prehensile limbs which they use to catch mutilate drown and tear apart their prey. There are so many of these creatures that no one has ever been able to identify and classify them all. Not even witchers. Geralt himself had rarely hunted in Ysgith and never in Lower Angren. The land was sparsely populated and the few humans who lived on the fringes of the bogs were accustomed to treating the monsters as part of the landscape. They kept their distance but it rarely occurred to them to hire a witcher to exterminate the monstrosities. Rarely however did not mean never. So Geralt knew Ysgith and its dangers.
Two swords and a bow he thought. And experience my witchers expertise. We ought to manage in a group. Especially when Ill be riding in the vanguard and keeping close watch on everything. On the rotten tree trunks piles of weed scrub tussocks of grass; and the plants orchids included. For in Ysgith even the orchids sometimes only look like plants but are actually venomous crab spiders. Ill have to keep Dandelion on a short leash and make sure he doesnt touch anything. Particularly since theres no shortage of plant life which likes to supplement its chlorophyll diet with morsels of meat. Plants whose shoots are as deadly as a crab spiders venom when they come into contact with skin. And the gas of course. Not to mention poisonous fumes. We shall have to find a way to cover our mouths and noses…
Well? Regis asked pulling him out of his reverie. Do you accept the plan?
Yes I do. Lets go.
Something finally prompted me the Witcher recalled not to talk to the rest of the company about the plan to cross Ysgith. And to ask Regis not to mention it either. I dont know why I was reluctant. Today when everything is absolutely and totally screwed up I might claim to have been aware of Milvas behaviour. Of the problems she was having. Of her obvious symptoms. But it wouldnt be true; I didnt notice anything and what I did notice I ignored. Like a blockhead. So we continued eastwards reluctant to turn towards the bogs.
On the other hand it was good that we lingered he thought drawing his sword and running his thumb over the razor-sharp blade. Had we headed straight for Ysgith then I wouldnt have this weapon today.
They hadnt seen or heard any soldiers since dawn. Milva led the way riding far ahead of the rest of the company. Regis Dandelion and Cahir were talking.
I just hope those druids will deign to help us find Ciri the poet said worriedly. Ive met druids and believe me they are uncooperative tight-lipped unfriendly eccentric recluses. They might not talk to us at all far less use magic to help us.
Regis knows one of the druids from Caed Dhu the Witcher reminded them.
Are you sure the friendship doesnt go back three or four centuries?
Its considerably more recent than that the vampire assured them with a mysterious smile. Anyhow druids enjoy longevity. Theyre always out in the open in the bosom of primordial and unpolluted nature which has a marvellous effect on the health. Breathe deeply Dandelion fill your lungs with forest air and youll be healthy too.
Ill soon grow fur in this bloody wilderness Dandelion said sneeringly. When I sleep I dream of inns drinks and bathhouses. A primordial pox on this primordial nature. I really have my doubts about its miraculous effect on the health particularly mental health. The said druids are the best example because theyre eccentric madmen. Theyre fanatical about nature and protecting it. Ive witnessed them petitioning the authorities more times than I care to remember. Dont hunt dont cut down trees dont empty cesspits into rivers and other similar codswallop. And the height of idiocy was the visit of a delegation all arrayed in mistletoe wreathes to the court of King Ethain in Cidaris. I happened to be there…
What did they want? Geralt asked curious.
Cidaris as you know is a kingdom where most people make a living from fishing. The druids demanded that the king order the use of nets with mesh of a specific size and harshly punish anyone who used finer nets than instructed. Ethains jaw dropped and the mistletoers explained that limiting the size of mesh was the only way to protect fish stocks from depletion. The king led them out onto the terrace pointed to the sea and told them how his bravest sailor had once sailed westwards for two months and only returned because supplies of fresh water had run out on his vessel and there still wasnt a sign of land on the horizon. Could the druids he asked imagine the fish stocks in a sea like that being exhausted? By all means the mistletoers confirmed. For though there was no doubt sea fishery would endure the longest as a means of acquiring food directly from nature the time would come when fish would run out and hunger would stare them all in the face. Then it would be absolutely necessary to fish using nets with large mesh to only catch fully grown specimens and protect the small fry. Ethain asked when in the druids opinion this dreadful time of hunger would occur and they said in about two thousand years according to their forecasts. The king bade them a courteous farewell and requested that they drop by in around a thousand years when he would think it over. The mistletoers didnt get the joke and began to protest so they were thrown out.
Theyre like that those druids Cahir agreed. Back home in Nilfgaard—
Got you! Dandelion cried triumphantly. Back home in Nilfgaard! Only yesterday when I called you a Nilfgaardian you leapt up as though youd been stung by a hornet! Perhaps you could finally decide who you are Cahir.
To you Cahir said shrugging I have to be a Nilfgaardian for as I see nothing will convince you otherwise. However for the sake of precision please know that in the Empire such a title is reserved exclusively for indigenous residents of the capital and its closest environs lying by the lower reaches of the Alba. My family originates in Vicovaro and thus—
Shut your traps! Milva commanded abruptly and not very politely from the vanguard.
They all immediately fell silent and reined in their horses having learned by now that it was a sign the girl had seen heard or instinctively sensed something edible provided it could be stalked and shot with an arrow. Milva had indeed raised her bow to shoot but had not dismounted. That meant it was not about food. Geralt approached her cautiously.
Smoke she said bluntly.
I cant see it.
Sniff it then.
The archers sense of smell had not deceived her even though the scent of smoke was faint. It couldnt have been the smoke from the conflagration behind them.
This smoke Geralt observed smells nice. Its coming from a campfire on which something is being roasted.
Do we steer clear of it? Milva asked quietly.
After weve taken a look he replied dismounting from his mare and handing the reins to Dandelion. It would be good to know what were steering clear of. And who we have behind us. Come with me Maria. The rest of you stay in your saddles. Be vigilant.
From the brush at the edge of the forest unfolded a view of a vast clearing with logs piled up in even cords of wood. A very thin ribbon of smoke rose from between the woodpiles. Geralt calmed down somewhat as nothing was moving in his field of vision and there was too little space between the woodpiles for a large group to be hiding there. Milva shared his opinion.
No horses she whispered. They arent soldiers. Woodmen Id say.
Me too. But Ill go and check. Cover me.
When he approached cautiously picking his way around the piles of logs he heard voices. He came closer. And was absolutely amazed. But his ears hadnt let him down.
Half a contract in diamonds!
Small slam in diamonds!
Barrel!
Pass. Your lead! Show your hand! Cards on the table! What the…?
Ha-ha-ha! Just the knave and some low numbers. Got you right where it hurts! Ill make you suffer before you get a small slam!
Well see about that. My knave. What? Its been taken? Hey Yazon you really got fucked over!
Why didnt you play the lady shithead? Pshaw I ought to take my rod to you…
The Witcher perhaps might still have been cautious; after all various different individuals could have been playing Barrel and many people might have been called Yazon. However a familiar hoarse squawking interrupted the card players excited voices.
Uuuckkk… me!
Hello boys Geralt said emerging from behind the woodpile. Im delighted to see you. Particularly as youre at full force again including the parrot.
Bloody hell! Zoltan Chivay said dropping his cards in astonishment then quickly leaping to his feet so suddenly that Field Marshal Windbag who was sitting on his shoulder fluttered his wings and shrieked in alarm. The Witcher as I live and breathe! Or is it a mirage? Percival do you see what I see?
Percival Schuttenbach Munro Bruys Yazon Varda and Figgis Merluzzo surrounded Geralt and seriously strained his right hand with their iron-hard grips. And when the rest of the company emerged from behind the logs the shouts of joy increased accordingly.
Milva! Regis! Zoltan shouted embracing them all. Dandelion alive and kicking even if your skulls bandaged! And what do you say you bloody busker about this latest melodramatic banality? Life it turns out isnt poetry! And do you know why? Because its so resistant to criticism!
Wheres Caleb Stratton? Dandelion asked looking around.
Zoltan and the others fell silent and grew solemn.
Caleb the dwarf finally said sniffing is sleeping in a birch wood far from his beloved peaks and Mount Carbon. When the Blacks overwhelmed us by the Ina his legs were too slow and he didnt make it to the forest… He caught a sword across the head and when he fell they dispatched him with bear spears. But come on cheer up weve already mourned him and thatll do. We ought to be cheerful. After all you got out of the madness in the camp in one piece. Why the companys even grown I see.
Cahir inclined his head a little under the dwarfs sharp gaze but said nothing.
Come on sit you down Zoltan invited. Were roasting a lamb here. We happened upon it a few days ago lonely and sad. We stopped it from dying a miserable death from hunger or in a wolfs maw by slaughtering it mercifully and turning it into food. Sit down. And Id like a few words with you Regis. And Geralt if you would.
Two women were sitting behind the woodpile. One of them who was suckling an infant turned away in embarrassment at the sight of them approaching. Nearby a young woman with an arm wrapped in none too clean rags was playing with two children on the sand. As soon as she raised her misty blank eyes to him the Witcher recognised her.
We untied her from the wagon which was already in flames the dwarf explained. It almost finished the way that priest wanted. You know the one who was after her blood. She passed through a baptism of fire nonetheless. The flames were licking at her scorching her to the raw flesh. We dressed her wounds as well as we could. We covered her in lard but its a bit messy. Barber-surgeon if you would…?
Right away.
When Regis tried to peel off the dressing the girl whimpered retreating and covering her face with her good hand. Geralt approached to hold her still but the vampire gestured him to stop. He looked deeply into the girls vacant eyes and she immediately calmed down and relaxed. Her head drooped gently on her chest. She didnt even flinch when Regis carefully peeled off the dirty rag and smeared an intense and strange smelling ointment on her burnt arm.
Geralt turned his head pointed with his chin at the two women and the two children and then bored his eyes into the dwarf. Zoltan cleared his throat.
We came across the two young uns and the women here in Angren he explained in hushed tones. Theyd got lost during their escape. They were alone fearful and hungry so we took them on board and were looking after them. It just seemed to happen.
It just seemed to happen Geralt echoed smiling faintly. Youre an incorrigible altruist Zoltan Chivay.
We all have our faults. I mean youre still determined to rescue your girl.
Indeed. Although its become more complicated than that.…
Because of that Nilfgaardian who was tracking you and has now joined the company?
Partly. Zoltan where are those fugitives from? Who were they fleeing? Nilfgaard or the Squirrels?
Hard to say. The kids know bugger all the women arent too talkative and get upset for no reason at all. If you swear near them or fart they go as red as beetroots… Never mind. But weve met other fugitives–woodmen–and they say the Nilfgaardians are prowling around here. Its our old friends probably the troop that came from the west from across the Ina. But apparently there are also units here that arrived from the south. From across the Yaruga.
And who are they fighting?
Its a mystery. The woodmen talked of an army being commanded by a White Queen or some such. That queens fighting the Blacks. Its said she and her army are even venturing onto the far bank of the Yaruga taking fire and sword to imperial lands.
What army could that be?
No idea Zoltan said and scratched an ear. See every day some company or other comes through messing up the tracks with their hooves. We dont ask who they are we just hide in the bushes…
Regis who was dealing with the burns on the girls arm interrupted their conversation.
The dressing must be changed daily he said to the dwarf. Ill leave you the ointment and some gauze which wont stick to the burns.
Thank you barber-surgeon.
Her arm will heal the vampire said softly looking at the Witcher. With time the scar will even vanish from her young skin. Whats happening in the poor girls head is worse though. My ointments cant cure that.
Geralt said nothing. Regis wiped his hands on a rag.
Its a curse he said in hushed tones to be able to sense a sickness–the entire essence of it–in the blood but not be able to treat it…
Indeed. Zoltan sighed. Patching up the skin is one thing but when the minds addled youre helpless. All you can do is give a damn and look after them… Thank you for your aid barber-surgeon. I see youve also joined the Witchers company.
It just seemed to happen.
Mmm Zoltan said and stroked his beard. And which way will you head in search of Ciri?
Were heading east to Caed Dhu to the druids circle. Were counting on the druids help…
No help said the girl with the bandaged arm in a ringing metallic voice. No help. Only blood. And a baptism of fire. Fire purifies. But also kills.
Zoltan was dumbfounded. Regis gripped his arm tightly and gestured him to remain silent. Geralt who could recognise a hypnotic trance said nothing and did not move.
He who has spilt blood and he who has drunk blood the girl said her head still lowered shall pay in blood. Within three days one shall die in the other and something shall die in each. They shall die inch by inch piece by piece… And when finally the iron-shod clogs wear out and the tears dry then the last shreds will pass. Even that which never dies shall die.
Speak on Regis said softly and gently. What can you see?
Fog. A tower in the fog. It is the Tower of Swallows… on a lake bound by ice.
What else do you see?
Fog.
What do you feel?
Pain…
Regis had no time to ask another question. The girl jerked her head screamed wildly and whimpered. When she raised her eyes there really was nothing but fog in them.
Zoltan Geralt recalled still running his fingers over the rune-covered blade started to respect Regis more after that incident altogether dropping the familiar tone he normally used in conversations with the barber-surgeon.
Regis requested they did not say a single word to the others about the strange incident. The Witcher was not too concerned about it. He had seen similar trances in the past and tended towards the view that the ravings of people under hypnosis were not prophecy but the regurgitation of thoughts they had intercepted and the suggestions of the hypnotist. Of course in this case it was not hypnosis but a vampire spell and Geralt mused over what else the girl might have picked up from Regiss mind had the trance lasted any longer.
They marched with the dwarves and their charges for half a day. Then Zoltan Chivay stopped the procession and took the Witcher aside.
It is time to part company he declared briefly. We have made a decision Geralt. Mahakam is looming up to the north and this valley leads straight to the mountains. Weve had enough adventures. Were going back home. To Mount Carbon.
I understand.
Its nice that you want to understand. I wish you and your company luck. Its a strange company if you dont mind me saying so.
They want to help the Witcher said softly. Thats something new for me. Which is why Ive decided not to enquire into their motives.
Thats wise Zoltan said removing the dwarven sihil in its lacquered scabbard wrapped in catskins from his back. Here you go take it. Before we go our separate ways.
Zoltan…
Dont say anything just take it. Well sit out the war in the mountains. We have no need of hardware. But itll be pleasant to recall from time to time that this Mahakam-forged sihil is in safe hands and whistles in a just cause. That it wont bring shame on itself. And when you use the blade to slaughter your Ciris persecutors take one down for Caleb Stratton. And remember Zoltan Chivay and the dwarven forges.
You can be certain I will Geralt said taking the sword and slinging it across his back. You can be certain Ill remember. In this rotten world Zoltan Chivay goodness honesty and integrity become deeply engraved in the memory.
That is true the dwarf said narrowing his eyes. Which is why I wont forget about you and the marauders in the forest clearing nor about Regis and the horseshoe in the coals. While were talking about reciprocity…
He broke off coughed hawked and spat.
Geralt we robbed a merchant near Dillingen. A wealthy man whod got rich as a hawker. We waylaid him after hed loaded his gold and jewels onto a wagon and fled the city. He defended his property like a lion and was yelling for help so he took a few blows of an axe butt to the pate and became as quiet as a lamb. Do you remember the chest we lugged along then carried on the wagon and finally buried in the earth by the River O? Well it contained his goods. Stolen loot which we intend to build our future on.
Why are you telling me this Zoltan?
Because I reckon you were still being misled by false appearances not so long ago. What you took for goodness and integrity was rottenness hidden under a pretty mask. Youre easy to deceive Witcher because you dont look into motives. But I dont want to deceive you. So dont look at those women and children… dont take the dwarf whos standing in front of you as virtuous and noble. Before you stands a thief a robber and possibly even a murderer. Because I cant be certain the hawker we roughed up didnt die in the ditch by the Dillingen highway.
A lengthy silence followed as they both looked northwards at the distant mountains enveloped in clouds.
Farewell Zoltan Geralt finally said. Perhaps the forces the existence of which Im slowly becoming convinced about will permit us to meet again one day. I hope our paths cross again. Id like to introduce Ciri to you Id like her to meet you. But even if it never happens know that I wont forget you. Farewell dwarf.
Will you shake my hand? Me a thief and a thug?
Without hesitation. Because Im not as easy to deceive as I once was. Although I dont enquire into peoples motives Im slowly learning the art of looking beneath masks.
Geralt swung the sihil and bisected a moth that was flying past.
After parting with Zoltan and his group he recalled we happened upon a group of wandering peasants in the forest. Some of them took flight on seeing us but Milva stopped a few by threatening them with her bow. The peasants it turned out had been captives of the Nilfgaardians not long before. They had been forced to fell cedar trees but a few days ago their guards had been attacked and overcome by a unit of soldiers who freed them. Now they were going home. Dandelion insisted they describe their liberators. He pushed them aggressively and asked sharp questions.
Those soldiers the peasant repeated they serve the White Queen. Theyre giving the Black infantry a proper hiding! They said theyre carrying out baboon attacks on the enemys rear lines.
What?
Im telling you arent I? Baboon attacks.
Bollocks to those baboons Dandelion said grimacing and waving a hand. Good people… I asked you what banners the army were bearing.
Divers ones sire. Mainly cavalry. And the infantry were wearing something crimson.
The peasant picked up a stick and described a rhombus in the sand.
A lozenge Dandelion who was well versed in heraldry said in astonishment. Not the Temerian lily but a lozenge. Rivias coat of arms. Interesting. Its two hundred miles from here to Rivia. Not to mention the fact that the armies of Lyria and Rivia were utterly annihilated during the fighting in Dol Angra and at Aldersberg and Nilfgaard has since occupied the country. I dont understand any of this!
Thats normal the Witcher interrupted. Enough talking. We need to go.
Ha! the poet cried. He had been pondering and analysing the information extracted from the peasants the whole time. Ive got it! Not baboons–guerrillas! Partisans! Do you see?
We see. Cahir nodded. In other words a Nordling partisan troop is operating in the area. A few units probably formed from the remains of the Lyrian and Rivian armies which were defeated at Aldersberg in the middle of July. I heard about that battle while I was with the Squirrels.
I consider the news heartening Dandelion declared proud he had been able to solve the mystery of the baboons. Even if the peasants had confused the heraldic emblems we dont seem to be dealing with the Temerian Army. And I dont think news has reached the Rivian guerrillas about the two spies who recently cheated Marshal Vissegerds gallows. Should we happen upon those partisans we have a chance to lie our way out of it.
Yes we have a chance… Geralt agreed calming the frolicking Roach. But to be honest Id prefer not to try our luck.
But theyre your countrymen Witcher Regis said. I mean they call you Geralt of Rivia.
A slight correction he replied coldly. I call myself that to make my name sound fancier. Its an addition that inspires more trust in my clients.
I see the vampire said smiling. And why exactly did you choose Rivia?
I drew sticks marked with various grand-sounding names. My witcher preceptor suggested that method to me although not initially. Only after Id insisted on adopting the name Geralt Roger Eric du Haute-Bellegarde. Vesemir thought it was ridiculous; pretentious and idiotic. I dare say he was right.
Dandelion snorted loudly looking meaningfully at the vampire and the Nilfgaardian.
My full name Regis said a little piqued by the look is authentic. And in keeping with vampire tradition.
Mine too Cahir hurried to explain. Mawr is my mothers given name and Dyffryn my great-grandfathers. And theres nothing ridiculous about it poet. And whats your name by the way? Dandelion must be a pseudonym.
I can neither use nor betray my real name the bard replied mysteriously proudly putting on airs. Its too celebrated.
It always sorely annoyed me added Milva who after being silent and gloomy for a long while had suddenly joined in the conversation when I was called pet names like Maya Manya or Marilka. When someone hears a name like that they always think they can pinch a girls behind.
It grew dark. The cranes flew off and their trumpeting faded into the distance. The breeze blowing from the hills subsided. The Witcher sheathed the sihil.
It was only this morning. This morning. And all hell broke loose in the afternoon.
We should have suspected earlier he thought. But which of us apart from Regis knew anything about this kind of thing? Naturally everyone noticed that Milva often vomited at dawn. But we all ate grub that turned our stomachs. Dandelion puked once or twice too and on one occasion Cahir got the runs so badly he feared it was dysentery. And the fact that the girl kept dismounting and going into the bushes well I took it as a bladder infection…
I was an ass.
I think Regis realised the truth. But he kept quiet. He kept quiet until he couldnt keep quiet any longer. When we stopped to make camp in a deserted woodmens shack Milva led him into the forest spoke to him at length and at times in quite a loud voice. The vampire returned from the forest alone. He brewed up and mixed some herbs and then abruptly summoned us all to the shack. He began rather vaguely in his annoying patronising manner.
Im addressing all of you Regis said. We are after all a fellowship and bear collective responsibility. The fact that the one who bears ultimate responsibility… direct responsibility so to speak… is probably not with us doesnt change anything.
Spit it out Dandelion said irritated. Fellowship responsibility… Whats the matter with Milva? Whats she suffering from?
Shes not suffering from anything Cahir said softly.
At least not strictly speaking Regis added. Milvas pregnant.
Cahir nodded to show it was as he suspected. Dandelion however was dumbstruck. Geralt bit his lip.
How far gone is she?
She declined quite rudely to give any dates at all including the date of her last period. But Im something of an expert. The tenth week.
Then refrain from your pompous appeals to direct responsibility Geralt said sombrely. Its not one of us. If you had any doubts at all in this regard I hereby dispel them. You were absolutely right however to talk about collective responsibility. Shes with us now. We have suddenly been promoted to the role of husbands and fathers. So lets listen carefully to what the physician says.
Wholesome regular meals Regis began to list. No stress. Sufficient sleep. And soon the end of horseback riding.
They were all quiet for a long time.
We hear you Regis Dandelion finally said. My fellow husbands and fathers we have a problem.
Its a bigger problem than you think the vampire said. Or a lesser one. It all depends on ones point of view.
I dont understand.
Well you ought to Cahir muttered.
She demanded Regis began a short while later that I prepare and give her a strong and powerful… medicament. She considers it a remedy for the problem. Her mind is made up.
And have you?
Regis smiled.
Without talking to the other fathers?
The medicine shes requesting Cahir said quietly isnt a miraculous panacea. I have three sisters so I know what Im talking about. She thinks it seems to me that shell drink the decoction in the evening and the next morning shell ride on with us. Not a bit of it. For about ten days there wont be a chance of her even sitting on a horse. Before you give her that medicine Regis you have to tell her that. And we can only give her the medicine after weve found a bed for her. A clean bed.
I see Regis said nodding. One voice in favour. What about you Geralt?
What about me?
Gentlemen. The vampire swept across them with his dark eyes. Dont pretend you dont understand.
In Nilfgaard Cahir said blushing and lowering his head the woman decides. No one has the right to influence her decision. Regis said that Milva is certain she wants the… medicament. Only for that reason absolutely only for that reason have I begun–in spite of myself–to think of it as an established fact. And to think about the consequences. But Im a foreigner who doesnt know… I ought not to get involved. I apologise.
What for? the troubadour asked surprised. Do you think were savages Nilfgaardian? Primitive tribes obeying some sort of shamanic taboo? Its obvious that only the woman can make a decision like that. Its her inalienable right. If Milva decides to—
Shut up Dandelion the Witcher snapped. Please shut up.
You dont agree? the poet said losing his temper. Are you planning to forbid her or—
Shut your bloody mouth or I wont be answerable for my actions! Regis you seem to be conducting something like a poll among us. Why? Youre the physician. The agent shes asking for… yes the agent. The word medicament doesnt suit me somehow… Only you can prepare and give her this agent. And youll do it should she ask you for it again. You wont refuse.
Ive already prepared the agent Regis said showing them all a little bottle made of dark glass. Should she ask again I shall not refuse. Should she ask again he repeated with force.
Whats this all about then? Unanimity? Total agreement? Is that what youre expecting?
You know very well what its about the vampire answered. You sense perfectly what ought to be done. But since you ask I shall tell you. Yes Geralt thats precisely what its about. Yes thats precisely what ought to be done. And no its not me thats expecting it.
Could you be clearer?
No Dandelion the vampire snapped. I cant be any clearer. Particularly since theres no need. Right Geralt?
Right the Witcher said resting his forehead on his clasped hands. Yes too bloody right. But why are you looking at me? You want me to do it? I dont know how. I cant. Im not suited for this role at all… Not at all get it?
No Dandelion interjected. I dont get it at all. Cahir? Do you get it?
The Nilfgaardian looked at Regis and then at Geralt.
I think I do he said slowly. I think so.
Ah the troubadour said nodding. Ah. Geralt understood right away and Cahir thinks he understands. I naturally demand to be enlightened but first Im told to be quiet and then I hear theres no need for me to understand. Thank you. Twenty years in the service of poetry long enough to know there are things you either understand at once even without words; or youll never understand them.
The vampire smiled.
I dont know anyone he said who could have put it more elegantly.
It was totally dark. The Witcher got to his feet.
Its now or never he thought. I cant run away from it. Theres no point putting it off. Its got to be done. And thats an end to it.
Milva sat alone by the tiny fire she had started in the forest in a pit left by a fallen tree away from the woodmens shack where the rest of the company were sleeping. She didnt move when she heard his footsteps. It was as though she was expecting him. She just shifted along making space for him on the fallen tree trunk.
Well? she said harshly not waiting for him to say anything. Were in a fix arent we eh?
He didnt answer.
You didnt expect this when we set off did you? When you let me join the company? You thought: So what if shes a peasant; a foolish country wench? You let me join. I wont be able to talk to her about brainy things on the road you thought but she might come in useful. Shes a healthy sturdy lass. She shoots a straight arrow she wont get a sore arse from the saddle and if it gets nasty she wont shit her britches. Shell come in useful. And it turns out shes no use just a hindrance. A millstone. A typical bloody woman!
Why did you come after me? he asked softly. Why didnt you stay in Brokilon? You must have known…
I did she interrupted. I mean I was with the dryads they always know whats wrong with a girl; you cant keep anything secret from them. They realised quicker than me… But I never thought Id start feeling poorly so soon. I thought Id drink some ergot or some other decoction and you wouldnt even notice wouldnt even guess…
Its not that simple.
I know. The vampire told me. I spent too long dragging my feet meditating hesitating. Now it wont be so easy…
Thats not what I meant.
Bollocks she said a moment later. Imagine this. I had more than one string to my bow… I saw how Dandelion puts on a brave face; but thought him weak soft not used to hardship. I was just waiting for him to give up and then wed have to offload him. I thought if it got hard Id go back with Dandelion… Now just look: Dandelions the hero and Im…
Her voice suddenly cracked. Geralt embraced her. And he knew at once it was the gesture she had been waiting for which she needed more than anything else. The roughness and hardness of the Brokilon archer disappeared just like that and what remained was the trembling gentle softness of a frightened girl. But it was she who interrupted the lengthening silence.
And thats what you told me… in Brokilon. That I would need a… a shoulder to lean on. That I would call out in the darkness… Youre here I can feel your arm next to mine… And I still want to scream… Oh dear oh dear… Why are you trembling?
Its nothing. A memory.
What will become of me?
He didnt answer. The question wasnt meant for him.
Daddy once showed me… Where I come from theres a black wasp that lives by the river and lays its eggs in a live caterpillar. The young wasps hatch and eat the caterpillar alive… from the inside… Something like thats in me now. In me inside me in my own belly. Its growing it keeps growing and its going to eat me alive…
Milva—
Maria. Im Maria not Milva. What kind of Red Kite am I? A mother hen with an egg not a Kite… Milva laughed with the dryads on the battleground pulled arrows from bloodied corpses. Waste of a good arrow shaft or a good arrowhead! And if someone was still breathing a knife across the throat! Milva was treacherous she led those people to their fate and laughed… Now their blood calls. That blood like a wasps venom is devouring Maria from the inside. Maria is paying for Milva.
He remained silent. Mainly because he didnt know what to say. The girl snuggled up closer against his shoulder.
I was guiding a commando to Brokilon she said softly. It was in Burnt Stump in June on the Sunday before summer solstice. We were chased there was a fight seven of us escaped on horseback. Five elves one she-elf and me. About half a mile to the Ribbon but the cavalry were behind us and in front of us darkness all around swamps bogs… At night we hid in the willows we had to let ourselves and the horses rest. Then the she-elf undressed without a word lay down… and the first elf lay with her… It froze me I didnt know what to do… Move away or pretend I couldnt see? The blood was pounding in my temples but I heard it when she said: Who knows what tomorrow will bring? Who will cross the Ribbon and who will perish? Enca minne. Enca minne a little love. Only this way she said can death be overcome. Death or fear. They were afraid she was afraid I was afraid… So I undressed too and lay down nearby. I placed a blanket under my back… When the first one embraced me I clenched my teeth for I wasnt ready I was terrified and dry… But he was wise–an elf after all–he only seemed young… wise… tender… He smelled of moss grass and dew… I held my arms out towards the second one myself… desiring… a little love? The devil only knows how much love there was in it and how much fear but Im certain there was more fear… For the love was fake. Perhaps well faked but fake even so like a pantomime where if the actors are skilled you soon forget whats playacting and whats the truth. But there was fear. There was real fear.
Geralt remained silent.
Nor did we manage to defeat death. They killed two of them at dawn before we reached the bank of the Ribbon. Of the three who survived I never saw any of them again. My mother always told me a wench knows whose fruit shes bearing… But I dont know. I didnt even know the names of those elves so how could I tell? How?
He said nothing. He let his arm speak for him.
And anyway why do I need to know? The vampire will soon have the draft ready… The time will come for me to be left in some village or other… No dont say a word; be silent. I know what youre like. You wont even give up that skittish mare you wont leave her you wont exchange her for another even though you keep threatening to. You arent the kind that leaves others behind. But now you have no choice. After I drink it I wont be able to sit in the saddle. But know this; when Ive recovered Ill set off after you. For I would like you to find your Ciri Witcher. To find her and get her back with my help.
So thats why you rode after me he said wiping his forehead. Thats why.
She lowered her head.
Thats why you rode after me he repeated. You set off to help rescue someone elses child. You wanted to pay; to pay off a debt that you intended to incur even when you set off… Someone elses child for your own a life for a life. And I promised to help you should you be in need. But Milva I cant help you. Believe me I cannot.
This time she remained silent. But he could not. He felt compelled to speak.
Back there in Brokilon I became indebted to you and swore Id repay you. Unwisely. Stupidly. You offered me help in a moment when I needed help very much. Theres no way of paying off a debt like that. Its impossible to repay something that has no price. Some say everything in the world–everything with no exception–has a price. Its not true. There are things with no price things that are priceless. But you realise it belatedly: when you lose them you lose them forever and nothing can get them back for you. I have lost many such things. Which is why I cant help you today.
But you have helped me she replied very calmly. You dont even know how youve helped me. Now go please. Leave me alone. Go away Witcher. Go before you destroy my whole world.
When they set off again at dawn Milva rode at the head calm and smiling. And when Dandelion who was riding behind her began to strum away on his lute she whistled the melody.
Geralt and Regis brought up the rear. At a certain moment the vampire glanced at the Witcher smiled and nodded in acknowledgement and admiration. Without a word. Then he took a small bottle of dark glass out of his medical bag and showed it to Geralt. Regis smiled again and threw the bottle into the bushes.
The Witcher said nothing.
When they stopped to water the horses Geralt led Regis away to a secluded place.
A change of plans he informed briefly. We arent going through Ysgith.
The vampire remained silent for a moment boring into him with his black eyes.
Had I not known he finally said that as a witcher you are only afraid of real hazards I should have thought you were worried by the preposterous chatter of a deranged girl.
But you do know. And youre sure to be guided by logic.
Indeed. However I should like to draw your attention to two matters. Firstly Milvas condition which is neither an illness nor a disability. The girl must of course take care of herself but she is utterly healthy and physically fit. I would even say more than fit. The hormones—
Drop the patronising superior tone Geralt interrupted because its getting on my nerves.
That was the first matter of the two I intended to bring up Regis continued. Heres the second: when Milva notices your overprotectiveness when she realises youre making a fuss and mollycoddling her shell be furious. And then shell feel stressed; which is absolutely inadvisable for her. Geralt I dont want to be patronising. I want to be rational.
Geralt did not answer.
Theres also a third matter Regis added still watching the Witcher carefully. We arent being compelled to go through Ysgith by enthusiasm or the lust for adventure but by necessity. Soldiers are roaming the hills and we have to make it to the druids in Caed Dhu. I understood it was urgent. That it was important for you to acquire the information and set off to rescue your Ciri as quickly as possible.
It is Geralt said looking away. Its very important to me. I want to rescue Ciri and get her back. Until recently I thought Id do it at any price. But no. I wont pay that price I wont consent to taking that risk. We wont go through Ysgith.
The alternative?
The far bank of the Yaruga. Well go upstream far beyond the swamps. And well cross the Yaruga again near Caed Dhu. If it turns out to be difficult only the two of us will meet the druids. Ill swim across and youll fly over as a bat. Why are you staring at me like that? I mean rivers being obstacles to vampires is another myth and superstition. Or perhaps Im wrong.
No you are not wrong. But I can only fly during a full moon not at any other time.
Thats only two weeks away. When we reach the right place itll almost be full moon.
Geralt the vampire said still not taking his eyes away from the Witcher. Youre a strange man. To make myself clear I wasnt being critical. Right then. We give up on Ysgith which is dangerous for a woman with child. We cross to the far bank of the Yaruga which you consider safer.
Im capable of assessing the level of risk.
I dont doubt it.
Not a word to Milva or the others. Should they ask its part of our plan.
Of course. Let us begin to look for a boat.
They didnt have to look for long and the result of their search surpassed their expectations. They didnt find just a boat but a ferryboat. Hidden among the willows craftily camouflaged with branches and bunches of bulrushes it was betrayed by the painter connecting it to the left bank.
The ferryman was also found. While they were approaching he quickly hid in the bushes but Milva spotted him and dragged him from the undergrowth by the collar. She also flushed out his helper a powerfully built fellow with the shoulders of an ogre and the face of an utter simpleton. The ferryman shook with fear and his eyes darted around like a couple of mice in an empty granary.
To the far bank? he whined when he found out what they wanted. Not a chance! Thats Nilfgaardian territory and theres a war on! Theyll catch us and stick us on a spike! Im not going! You can kill me but Im not going!
We can kill you Milva said grinding her teeth. We can also beat you up first. Open your trap again and youll see what we can do.
Im sure the fact theres a war on the vampire said boring his eyes into the ferryman doesnt interfere with smuggling does it my good man? Which is what your ferry is for after all craftily positioned as it is far from the royal and Nilfgaardian toll collectors. Am I right? Go on push it into the water.
That would be wise Cahir added stroking his sword hilt. Should you hesitate we shall cross the river ourselves without you and your ferry will remain on the far bank. To get it back youll have to swim across doing the breaststroke. This way you ferry us across and return. An hour of fear and then you can forget all about it.
But if you resist you halfwit Milva snapped Ill give you such a beating you wont forget us till next winter!
The ferryman yielded in the face of these hard indisputable arguments and soon the entire company was on the ferry. Some of the horses particularly Roach resisted and refused to go aboard but the ferryman and his dopey helper used twitches made of sticks and rope. The skill with which they calmed the animals proved it was not the first time they had smuggled stolen mounts across the Yaruga. The giant simpleton got down to turning the wheel which drove the ferry and the crossing began.
When they reached the peaceful waters and felt the gentle breeze their moods improved. Crossing the Yaruga was something new a clear milestone marking progress in their trek. In front of them was the Nilfgaardian bank the frontier the border. They all suddenly cheered up. It even affected the ferrymans foolish helper who began to whistle an inane tune. Even Geralt was strangely euphoric as though Ciri would emerge at any moment from the alder grove on the far bank and shout out joyfully on seeing him.
Instead of that the ferryman began shouting. And not joyfully in the least.
By the Gods! Were done for!
Geralt looked towards where he was pointing and cursed. Suits of armour flashed and hooves thudded among the alders on the high bank. A moment later the jetty on the left bank was teeming with horsemen.
Black Riders! the ferryman screamed paling and releasing the wheel. Nilfgaardians! Death! Gods save us!
Hold the horses Dandelion! Milva yelled trying to remove her bow from her saddle with one hand. Hold the horses!
They arent imperial forces Cahir said. I dont think…
His voice was drowned out by the shouts of the horsemen on the jetty and the ferrymans yelling. Urged on by the yelling the daft helper seized a hatchet swung it and brought the blade down powerfully on the rope. The ferryman came forward to help him with another hatchet. The horsemen on the jetty noticed it and also began to yell. Several of them rode into the water to seize the rope. Others began swimming towards the ferry.
Leave that rope alone! Dandelion shouted. Its not Nilfgaard! Dont cut it—
It was too late however. The loose end of the rope sank heavily into the water the ferry turned a little and began to float downstream. The horsemen on the bank started yelling.
Dandelions right Cahir said grimly. They arent imperial forces… Theyre on the Nilfgaardian bank but it isnt Nilfgaard.
Of course they arent! Dandelion called. I recognise their livery! Eagles and lozenges! Its Lyrias coat of arms! Theyre the Lyrian guerrillas! Hey you men…
Get down you idiot!
The poet as usual rather than listen to the warning wanted to know what it was all about. And right then arrows whistled through the air. Some of them thudded into the side of the ferry some of them flew over the deck and splashed into the water. Two flew straight for Dandelion but the Witcher already had his sword in his hand leapt forward and deflected both of them with swift blows.
By the Great Sun Cahir grunted. He deflected two arrows! Remarkable! Ive never seen anything like it…
And you never will again! Thats the first time Ive ever managed two in a row! Now get down will you!
However the soldiers by the jetty had stopped shooting seeing the current pushing the drifting ferryboat straight towards their bank. Water foamed beside the horses which had been driven into the river. The ferry station was filling up with more horsemen. There were at least two hundred of them.
Help! the ferryman yelled. Seize the poles mlords! Were being carried to the bank!
They understood at once and fortunately there were plenty of poles. Regis and Dandelion held the horses and Milva Cahir and the Witcher aided the efforts of the ferryman and his duffer of an assistant. Pushed off by five poles the ferryboat turned and began to move more quickly clearly heading towards the midstream. The soldiers on the bank started yelling again and took up their bows once again. Again several arrows whistled past and one of their horses neighed wildly. The ferryboat carried away by a more powerful current was fortunately travelling quickly and began to move further from the bank beyond the range of an effective arrow shot.
They were now floating in the middle of the river on calm waters. The ferryboat was spinning like a turd in an ice hole and the horses stamped and whinnied tugging at the reins which were being held by Dandelion and the vampire. The horsemen on the bank yelled and shook their fists at them. Geralt suddenly noticed a rider on a white steed among them who was waving a sword and issuing orders. A moment later the cavalcade withdrew into the forest and galloped along the edge of the high bank. Their armour flashed among the riverside undergrowth.
They arent letting us go the ferryman groaned. They know that the rapids round the corner will push us over towards the bank again… Keep those poles at the ready mlords! When it turns towards the right bank well have to help the old tub get the better of the current and land… Else were doomed…
They floated turning drifting slightly towards the right bank; a steep high bluff bristling with crooked pine trees. The left bank the one that was moving away from them had become flat and jutted into the river in a semi-circular sandy spit. Horsemen galloped onto the spit their momentum taking them into the water. By the spit there was clearly a sand-bank channel a shallow and before the water had reached the height of the horses bellies the horsemen had ridden quite far into the river.
Were in arrow range Milva judged grimly. Get down.
Arrows began whistling again and some of them thumped into the planks. But the current pushing them away from the channel quickly carried the ferryboat towards a sharp bend on the right.
To the poles! the trembling ferryman ordered. With a will. Lets land before the rapids carry us away!
It wasnt so easy. The current was swift the water deep and the ferryboat large heavy and cumbersome. At first it did not react to their efforts at all but finally the poles found more purchase on the riverbed. It looked as though they might succeed when Milva suddenly dropped her pole and pointed wordlessly at the right bank.
This time… Cahir said wiping sweat from his brow. This time its definitely Nilfgaard.
Geralt saw it too. The horsemen who had suddenly appeared on the right bank were wearing black and green cloaks and the horses had typical Nilfgaardian blinders. There were at least a hundred of them.
Now were done for… the ferryman whimpered. Mother of mine its the Black Riders!
To the poles! the Witcher roared. To the poles and into the current! Away from the bank!
Once again it turned out to be a difficult task. The current by the right bank was powerful and pushed the ferryboat straight under the high bluff from which the shouts of the Nilfgaardians could be heard. A moment later when Geralt who was leaning on his pole looked upwards he saw pine branches above his head. An arrow shot from the top of the bluff penetrated the ferryboats deck almost vertically two feet from him. He deflected another which was heading for Cahir with a blow of his sword.
Milva Cahir the ferryman and his assistant pushed away–not from the riverbed but from the bank where the bluff was. Geralt dropped his sword caught up a pole and helped them and the ferryboat began to drift towards the calm waters again. But they were still dangerously close to the right bank and to their pursuers galloping along the edge of it. Before they could move away the bluff ended and Nilfgaardians flooded onto the flat reedy bank. Fletchings screamed through the air.
Get down!
The ferrymans helper suddenly coughed strangely dropping his pole into the water. Geralt saw a bloodied arrowhead and four inches of shaft sticking out of his back. Cahirs chestnut reared neighed in pain jerking its penetrated neck knocked Dandelion down and leaped overboard. The remaining horses also neighed and thrashed and the ferryboat shook from the impact of their hooves.
Hold the horses! the vampire yelled. Three—
He suddenly broke off fell backwards against the planks and sat down with his head lolling. A black-feathered arrow was sticking out of his chest.
Milva saw it too. She screamed with fury picked up her bow knelt and emptied the quiver of arrows right on the deck. Then she began to shoot. Quickly. Arrow after arrow. Not one missed its target.
There was confusion on the bank the Nilfgaardians retreating into the forest leaving their dead and wounded in the reeds. Hidden in the undergrowth they continued to shoot but their arrows were barely reaching the ferryboat which was being carried towards the midstream by the swift current. The distance was too great for the Nilfgaardian archers to shoot accurately. But not too great for Milva.
Among the Nilfgaardians suddenly appeared an officer in a black cape and a helmet with ravens wings flapping on it. He was yelling brandishing a mace and pointing downstream. Milva stood took a broader stance pulled the bowstring to her ear and quickly took aim. The arrow hissed in the air and the officer bent backwards in his saddle and sagged in the arms of the soldiers holding him up. Milva drew her bow again and released her fingers from the bowstring. One of the Nilfgaardians holding up the officer screamed piercingly and lurched back off his horse. The others disappeared into the forest.
Masterful shots Regis said calmly from behind the Witchers back. But itd be better if you grabbed the poles. Were still too close to the bank and were being carried into the shallows.
The archer and Geralt turned around.
Arent you dead? they asked in in chorus.
Did you think the vampire said showing them the black-fletched shaft I could be harmed by any old bit of wood?
There was no time to be surprised. The ferryboat was once again turning around in the current and moving along the calm waters. But on the bend in the river another beach appeared a sandbank and shallow channel and the bank teemed with black-clad Nilfgaardians again. Some of them were riding into the river and preparing to shoot. Everyone including Dandelion rushed for the poles which soon could not reach the bottom as–owing to the combined effort–the current finally carried the ferryboat towards swifter water.
Good Milva panted dropping her pole. Now they wont be able to reach us…
One of thems made it to the sandbank! Dandelion cried. Hes going to shoot! Get out of sight!
Hell miss Milva said coldly.
The arrow splashed into the water two yards from the ferryboats bow.
Hes doing it again! the troubadour yelled peeping out from above the saxboard. Look out!
Hell miss Milva repeated straightening the bracer on her left forearm. Hes got a good bow but hes as much an archer as my old grannie. Hes overexcited. After he releases he trembles and shakes like a woman with a slug wriggling up her arse. Hold onto the horses so I dont get knocked over.
This time the Nilfgaardian shot too high and the arrow whistled over the ferryboat. Milva raised her bow her stance firm quickly pulled the bowstring to her cheek and released it gently not changing her position by even a fraction of an inch. The Nilfgaardian tumbled into the water as though struck by lightning and began to float with the current. His black cape billowed out like a balloon.
Thats how its done Milva said and lowered her bow. But its too late for him to learn.
The others are galloping after us Cahir said pointing towards the right bank. And I vouch they wont stop chasing us. Not now that Milvas shot their officer. The rivers meandering and the current will carry us towards their bank again on the next bend. They know it and theyll be waiting…
Right now we have another worry the ferryman moaned getting up from his knees and throwing off his dead helper. Were being pushed straight for the left bank… By the Gods were caught between two fires… And all because of you mlords! The blood will fall on your heads…
Shut your trap and grab a pole!
The flat left bank which was now nearer was teeming with horsemen identified by Dandelion as Lyrian partisans. They were yelling and waving their arms. Geralt noticed a rider on a white horse among them. He wasnt certain but he thought the rider was a woman. A fair-haired woman in armour but without a helmet.
What are they yelling? Dandelion said straining to listen. Something about a queen is it?
The shouting on the left bank intensified. They could also hear the clanging of steel distinctly now.
Its a battle Cahir said bluntly. Look. Those are imperial forces running out of the forest. The Nordlings were fleeing from them and now theyve been caught in a trap.
The way out of the trap Geralt said spitting into the water was the ferry. I think they wanted to save at least their queen and their officers by ferrying them onto the other bank. And we hijacked the ferry. Oh they wont like us now no no…
But they ought to! Dandelion said. The ferry wouldnt have saved anyone just carried them straight into the clutches of the Nilfgaardians on the right bank. Lets avoid the right bank too. We can parley with the Lyrians but the Blacks will beat us to death without a second thought…
Its carrying us quicker and quicker Milva said spitting into the water too and watching her saliva drift away. And right down the centre of the run. They can kiss our arses both armies. The bends are gentle the banks are level and overgrown with willows. Were heading down the Yaruga and they wont catch up with us. Theyll soon get bored.
Bullshit the ferryman groaned. The Red Port is ahead of us… Theres a bridge there! And shallows! The ferry will get stuck… If they overtake us theyll be waiting for us…
The Nordlings wont overtake us Regis said pointing at the left bank from the stern. They have their own worries.
Indeed a fierce battle was raging on the right bank. Most of the fighting took place in the forest and only betrayed itself by battle cries but here and there the black and colourfully uniformed horsemen were delivering blows to each other in the water near the bank. Bodies were splashing into the Yaruga. The tumult and clang of steel quietened and the ferryboat majestically but quite quickly headed downstream.
Finally no soldiers could be seen on the overgrown banks and no sounds of their pursuers could be heard. Only when Geralt was starting to hope everything would end well did they see a wooden bridge spanning the two banks. The river flowed beneath the bridge past sandbars and islands the largest of which supported the bridges piers. On the right bank lay the timber port; they could see thousands of logs piled up there.
Its shallow all around the ferryman panted. We can only get through the middle to the right of the island. The current is carrying us there now but grab the poles they might help if we get stuck…
There are soldiers on the bridge Cahir said shielding his eyes with his hand. On the bridge and in the port…
They could all see the soldiers. And they all saw the band of horsemen in black and green cloaks flooding out of the forest behind the port. They were even close enough to hear the noise of battle.
Nilfgaard Cahir confirmed drily. The men who were pursuing us. So the men in the port are Nordlings…
To the poles! the ferryman yelled. Maybe well sneak through while theyre fighting!
They did not manage to. They were very close to the bridge when it suddenly began to shake from the boots of running soldiers. The footmen were wearing white tunics decorated with red lozenges over their hauberks. Most of them had crossbows which they rested on the railing and aimed at the ferryboat approaching the bridge.
Dont shoot boys! Dandelion yelled at the top of his voice. Dont shoot! Were with you!
The soldiers did not hear or did not want to hear.
The salvo of quarrels turned out to have tragic results. The only human to be hit was the ferryman who was still trying to steer with his pole. A bolt pierced him right through. Cahir Milva and Regis ducked down behind the side in time. Geralt seized his sword and deflected one quarrel but there were too many of them. By an inexplicable miracle Dandelion who was still yelling and waving his arms was not hit. However the hail of missiles caused real carnage among the horses. The grey slumped to its knees struck by three quarrels. Milvas black fell kicking. Regiss bay too. Roach shot in the withers reared and leaped overboard.
Dont shoot! Dandelion bellowed. Were with you!
This time it worked.
The ferryboat carried by the current ploughed into a sandbank with a grinding sound and came to rest. They all jumped onto the island or into the water escaping the hooves of the agonised thrashing horses. Milva was the last for her movements had suddenly become horrifyingly slow. Shes been hit the Witcher thought seeing the girl clambering clumsily over the side and dropping inertly on the sand. He leapt towards her but the vampire was quicker.
Somethings broken off in me the girl said very slowly. And very unnaturally. And then she pressed her hands to her womb. Geralt saw the leg of her woollen trousers darkening with blood.
Pour that over my hands Regis said handing Geralt a small bottle he had removed from his bag. Pour that over my hands quickly.
What is it?
Shes miscarrying. Give me a knife. I have to cut open her clothes. And go away.
No Milva said. I want him to stay…
A tear trickled down her cheek.
The bridge above them thundered with soldiers boots.
Geralt! Dandelion yelled.
The Witcher seeing what the vampire was doing to Milva turned his head away in embarrassment. He noticed soldiers in white tunics rushing across the bridge at great speed. An uproar could still be heard from the right bank and the timber port.
Theyre running away Dandelion panted running to him and tugging his sleeve. The Nilfgaardians are already on the right bridgehead! The battle is still raging there but most of the army are fleeing to the left bank! Do you hear? We have to flee too!
We cant he said through clenched teeth. Milvas miscarried. She cant walk.
Dandelion swore.
Well have to carry her then he declared. Its our only chance…
Not our only one Cahir said. Geralt onto the bridge.
What do you mean?
Well hold back their flight. If those Nordlings can hold the right bridgehead long enough perhaps well be able to escape by the left one.
How do you plan to do it?
Im an officer dont forget. Climb up that pier and onto the bridge!
On the bridge Cahir demonstrated that he was indeed experienced at bringing panicked soldiers under control.
Where are you going scum? Where are you going bastards? he yelled. Each roar was accompanied by a punch as he knocked a fleeing soldier down onto the bridges boards. Stop! Stop you fucking swine!
Some–but far from all–of the fleeing soldiers stopped terrified by the roaring and flashing of the sword Cahir was whirling dramatically. Others tried to sneak behind his back. But Geralt had already drawn his sword and joined the spectacle.
Where are you going? he shouted catching one of the soldiers in his tracks in a powerful grip. Where? Stand fast! Get back there!
Nilfgaard sire! the soldier screamed. Its a bloodbath! Let me go!
Cowards! Dandelion roared in a voice Geralt had never heard as he clambered onto the bridge. Base cowards! Chickenhearts! Would you flee to save your skins? To live out your days in ignominy you varlets?
They are too many Sir Knight! We stand no chance!
The centurions fallen… another of them moaned. The decurions have taken flight! Death is coming!
We must run!
Your comrades Cahir yelled brandishing his sword are still fighting on the bridgehead and at the port! They are still fighting! Dishonour will be his who does not go to their aid! Follow me!
Dandelion the Witcher hissed. Get down onto the island. You and Regis will have to get Milva onto the left bank somehow. Well what are you waiting for?
Follow me boys! Cahir repeated whirling his sword. Follow me if the Gods are dear to you! To the timber port! Death to the dogs!
About a dozen soldiers shook their weapons and took up the cry their voices expressing very varied degrees of conviction. About a dozen of the men who had already run away turned back in shame and joined the ragtag army on the bridge. An army which was suddenly being led by the Witcher and the Nilfgaardian.
They might really have set off for the timber port but the bridgehead was suddenly black with the cavalrymens cloaks. The Nilfgaardians broke through the defence and forced their way onto the bridge. Horseshoes thudded on the planking. Some of the soldiers who had been stopped darted away others stood indecisively. Cahir cursed. In Nilfgaardian. But no one apart from the Witcher paid any attention to it.
What has been started must be finished Geralt snapped gripping his sword tightly. Lets get them! We have to spur our men into action.
Geralt Cahir said stopping and looking at him uncertainly. Do you want me to… to kill my own? I cant…
I dont give a shit about this war the Witcher said grinding his teeth. This is about Milva. You joined the company so make a choice. Follow me or join the black cloaks. But do it quickly.
Im coming with you.
And so it was that a witcher and a Nilfgaardian roared savagely whirled their swords and leapt forward together without a second thought–two brothers in arms two allies and comrades–in an encounter with their common foe in an uneven battle. And that was their baptism of fire. A baptism of shared fighting fury madness and death. They were going to their deaths the two of them. Or so they thought. For they could not know that they would not die that day on that bridge over the River Yaruga. They did not know that they were both destined for other deaths in other places and times.
The Nilfgaardians had silver scorpions embroidered on their sleeves. Cahir slashed two of them with quick blows of his long sword and Geralt cut up two more with blows of his sihil. Then he jumped onto the bridges railing running along it to attack the rest. He was a witcher and keeping his balance was a trifle to him but his acrobatic feat astonished the attackers. And amazed they died from blows of his dwarven blade which cut through their hauberks as though they were made of wool their blood splashing the bridges polished timbers.
Seeing their commanders valour the now larger army on the bridge raised a cheer a roar which expressed returning morale and a growing fighting spirit. And so it was that the previously panicked fugitives attacked the Nilfgaardians like fierce wolves slashing with swords and battle-axes stabbing with spears and halberds and striking with clubs and maces. The railing broke and horses plunged into the river with their black-cloaked riders. The roaring army hurtled onto the bridgehead pushing their chance commanders ahead of them not letting Geralt and Cahir do what they wanted to do. For they wanted to withdraw quietly return to help Milva and flee to the left bank.
A battle was still raging at the timber port. The Nilfgaardians had surrounded and cut off the soldiers–who had not yet fled–from the bridge. Those in turn were defending themselves ferociously behind barricades built from cedar and pine logs. At the sight of the reinforcements the handful of soldiers raised a joyful cry. A little too hastily however. The tight wedge of reinforcements swept the Nilfgaardians off the bridge. But now a flanking cavalry counter-attack began on the bridgehead. Had it not been for the barricades and timber ports woodpiles which inhibited both escape and the cavalrys momentum the infantry would have been scattered in an instant. Pressed against the woodpiles the soldiers took up a fierce fight.
For Geralt it was something he did not know a completely new kind of fighting. Swordsmanship was out of the question it was simply a chaotic melee; a ceaseless parrying of blows falling from every direction. However he continued to take advantage of the rather undeserved privilege of being the commander; the soldiers crowded around him covering his flanks protected his back and cleared the area in front of him creating space for him to strike and mortally wound. But it was becoming more and more cramped. The Witcher and his army found themselves fighting shoulder to shoulder with the bloody and exhausted handful of soldiers–mainly dwarven mercenaries–defending the barricade. They fought surrounded on all sides.
And then came fire.
One side of the barricade located between the timber port and the bridge had been a huge pile of pine branches as spiky as a hedgehog an unsurmountable obstacle to horses and infantry. Now that pile was on fire; someone had thrown a burning brand into it. The defenders retreated assaulted by flames and smoke. Crowded together blinded hampering each other they began to die under the blows of the attacking Nilfgaardians.
Cahir saved the day. Making use of his military experience he did not allow the soldiers gathering around him on the barricade to be surrounded. He had been cut off from Geralts group but was now returning. He had even managed to acquire a horse in a black caparison and now hacking in all directions with his sword he charged at the flank. Behind him yelling wildly halberdiers and spearmen in red-lozenged tunics forced their way into the gap.
Geralt put his fingers together and struck the burning pile with the Aard Sign. He did not expect any great effect since he had been forced to make do without his witcher elixirs for several weeks. But he succeeded nonetheless. The pile of branches exploded and fell apart showering sparks around.
Follow me! he roared slashing a Nilfgaardians temple when the man was trying to push his way onto the barricade. Follow me! Through the fire!
And so they set off scattering the still-burning pyre with their spears throwing the flaming brands they had picked up with their bare hands at the Nilfgaardian horses.
A baptism of fire the Witcher thought furiously striking and parrying blows. I was meant to pass through fire for Ciri. And Im passing through fire in a battle which is of no interest to me at all. Which I dont understand in any way. The fire that was meant to purify me is just scorching my hair and face.
The blood he was splattered with hissed and steamed.
Onward comrades! Cahir! To me!
Geralt! Cahir shouted sweeping another Nilfgaardian from the saddle. To the bridge! Force your way through to the bridge! Well close ranks…
He did not finish for a cavalryman in a black breastplate without a helmet with flowing bloodied hair galloped at him. Cahir parried a blow of the riders long sword but was thrown from his horse which sat down on its haunches. The Nilfgaardian leant over to pin him to the ground with his sword. But he did not. He stayed his thrust. The silver scorpion on his breastplate flashed.
Cahir! he cried in astonishment. Cahir aep Ceallach!
Morteisen… no less astonishment could be heard in the voice of Cahir spread-eagled on the ground.
A dwarven mercenary running alongside Geralt in a blackened and charred tunic with a red lozenge didnt waste time being astonished by anything. He plunged his bear spear powerfully into the Nilfgaardians belly unseating the enemy with the impetus of the blow. Another leapt forward stamping on the fallen cavalrymans black breastplate with a heavy boot and thrust his spears blade straight into his throat. The Nilfgaardian wheezed puking blood and raking the sand with his spurs.
At the same moment the Witcher received a blow in the base of his spine with something very heavy and very hard. His knees buckled beneath him. Falling he heard a great triumphant roar. He saw the horsemen in black cloaks fleeing into the trees. He heard the bridge thundering beneath the hooves of the cavalry arriving from the left bank carrying a banner with an eagle surrounded by red lozenges.
And thus for Geralt ended the great battle for the bridge on the Yaruga. A battle which later chroniclers did not of course even mention.
Dont worry my lord the field surgeon said tapping and feeling the Witchers back. The bridge is down. We arent in danger of being attacked from the other bank. Your comrades and the woman are also safe. Is she your wife?
No.
Oh and I thought… For its always dreadful sire when pregnant women suffer in wars…
Be silent. Not a word about it. What are those banners?
Dont you know who you were fighting for? Who would have thought such a thing were possible… Thats the Lyrian Army. See the black Lyrian eagle and the red Rivian lozenges. Good Im done here. It was only a bump. Your back will hurt a little but its nothing. Youll recover.
Thanks.
I should be thanking you. Had you not held the bridge Nilfgaard would have slaughtered us on the far bank forcing us back into the water. We wouldnt have been able to flee from them… You saved the queen! Well farewell sire. I have to go others need me to tend to their wounds.
Thanks.
He sat on a log in the port weary sore and apathetic. Alone. Cahir had disappeared somewhere. The golden-green Yaruga flowed between the piers of the ruined bridge sparkling in the light of the sun which was setting in the west.
He raised his head hearing steps the clatter of horseshoes and the clanking of armour.
This is he Your Majesty. Let me help you dismount…
Thtay away.
Geralt lifted up his eyes. Before him stood a woman in a suit of armour a woman with very pale hair almost as pale as his own. He saw that the hair was not fair but grey although the womans face did not bear the marks of old age. A mature age indeed. But not old age.
The woman pressed a batiste handkerchief with lace hems to her lips. The handkerchief was heavily blood-stained.
Rise sire one of the knights standing alongside whispered to Geralt. And pay homage. It is the Queen.
The Witcher stood up. And bowed overcoming the pain in his lower back.
Did you thafeguard the bridge?
I beg your pardon?
The woman took the handkerchief away from her mouth and spat blood. Several red drops fell on her ornamented breastplate.
Her Royal Highness Meve Queen of Lyria and Rivia said a knight in a purple cloak decorated with gold embroidery standing beside the woman is asking if you led the heroic defence of the bridge on the Yaruga?
It just seemed to happen.
Theemed to happen? the queen said trying to laugh but not having much success. She scowled swore foully but indistinctly and spat again. Before she had time to cover her mouth he saw a nasty wound and noticed she lacked several teeth. She caught his eye.
Yes she said behind her handkerchief looking him in the eye. Thome thon-of-a-bitch thmacked me right in the fathe. A trifle.
Queen Meve the knight in the purple cloak announced fought in the front line like a man like a knight opposing the superior forces of Nilfgaard! The wound hurts but does not shame her! And you saved her and our corps. After some traitors had captured and hijacked the ferryboat that bridge became our only hope. And you defended it valiantly…
Thtop Odo. What ith your name hero?
Mine?
Certainly the knight in purple said looking at him menacingly. What is the matter with you? Are you wounded? Injured? Were you struck in the head?
No.
Then answer the Queen! You see do you not that she is wounded in the mouth and has difficulty speaking!
Thtop that Odo.
The purple knight bowed and then glanced at Geralt.
Your name?
Very well he thought. Ive had enough of this. I will not lie.
Geralt.
Geralt from where?
From nowhere.
Has no one bethtowed a knighthood on you? Meve asked once more decorating the sand beneath her feet with a red splash of saliva mixed with blood.
I beg your pardon? No no. Nobody has. Your Majesty.
Meve drew her sword.
Kneel.
He obeyed still unable to believe what was happening. He was still thinking of Milva and the route he had chosen for her fearing the swamps of Ysgith.
The queen turned to the Purple Knight.
You will thpeak the formula. I am toothleth.
For outstanding valour in the fight for a just cause the Purple Knight recited with emphasis. For showing proof of virtue honour and loyalty to the Crown I Meve by grace of the Gods the Queen of Lyria and Rivia by my power right and privilege dub you a knight. Serve us faithfully. Bear this blow shirk not away from pain.
Geralt felt the touch of the blade on his shoulder. He looked into the queens pale green eyes. Meve spat thick red gore pressed the handkerchief to her face and winked at him over the lace.
The Purple Knight walked over to her and whispered something. The Witcher heard the words: predicate Rivian lozenges banner and virtue.
That ith tho Meve said nodding. She spoke more and more clearly overcoming the pain and sticking her tongue in the gap left by missing teeth. You held the bridge with tholdierth of Rivia valiant Geralt of nowhere. It jutht theemed to happen ha ha. Well it hath come to me to give you a predicate for that deed: Geralt of Rivia. Ha ha.
Bow sir knight the Purple Knight hissed.
The freshly dubbed knight Geralt of Rivia bowed low so that Queen Meve his suzerain would not see the smile–the bitter smile–that he was unable to resist.
extras
meet the author
ANDRZEJ SAPKOWSKI was born in 1948 in Poland. He studied economy and business but the success of his fantasy cycle about the sorcerer Geralt of Rivia turned him into a bestselling writer. He is now one of Polands most famous and successful authors.
introducing
If you enjoyed
BAPTISM OF FIRE
look out for
RED COUNTRY
by Joe Abercrombie
They burned her home.
They stole her brother and sister.
But vengeance is following.
Shy South hoped to bury her bloody past and ride away smiling but shell have to sharpen up some bad old ways to get her family back and shes not a woman to flinch from what needs doing. She sets off in pursuit with only a pair of oxen and her cowardly old stepfather Lamb for company. But it turns out Lambs buried a bloody past of his own. And out in the lawless Far Country the past never stays buried.
Their journey will take them across the barren plains to a frontier town gripped by gold fever through feud duel and massacre high into the unmapped mountains to a reckoning with the Ghosts. Even worse it will force them into an alliance with Nicomo Cosca infamous soldier of fortune and his feckless lawyer Temple two men no one should ever have to trust…
Some Kind of Coward
Gold. Wist made the word sound like a mystery there was no solving. Makes men mad.
Shy nodded. Those that aint mad already.
They sat in front of Stupfers Meat House which mightve sounded like a brothel but was actually the worst place to eat within fifty miles and that with some fierce competition. Shy perched on the sacks in her wagon and Wist on the fence where he always seemed to be like hed such a splinter in his arse hed got stuck there. They watched the crowd.
I came here to get away from people said Wist.
Shy nodded. Now look.
Last summer you couldve spent all day in town and not seen two people you didnt know. You couldve spent some days in town and not seen two people. A lot can change with a few months and a gold find. Now Squaredeal was bursting at its ragged seams with bold pioneers. One-way traffic headed west towards imagined riches some charging through fast as the clutter would allow some stopping off to add their own share of commerce and chaos. Wagon-wheels clattered mules nickered and horses neighed livestock honked and oxen bellowed. Men women and children of all races and stations did plenty of their own honking and bellowing too in every language and temper. It mightve been quite the colourful spectacle if everywhere the blown dust hadnt leached each tone to that same grey ubiquity of dirt.
Wist sucked a noisy mouthful from his bottle. Quite the variety aint there?
Shy nodded. All set on getting something for nothing.
All struck with a madness of hope. Or of greed depending on the observers faith in humanity which in Shys case stood less than brim-full. All drunk on the chance of reaching into some freezing pool out there in the great empty and plucking up a new life with both hands. Leaving their humdrum selves behind on the bank like a shed skin and taking a short cut to happiness.
Tempted to join em? asked Wist.
Shy pressed her tongue against her front teeth and spat through the gap between. Not me. If they made it across the Far Country alive the odds were stacked high theyd spend a winter up to their arses in ice water and dig up naught but dirt. And if lightning did strike the end of your spade what then? Aint like rich folk got no trouble.
Thered been a time Shy thought shed get something for nothing. Shed her skin and step away smiling. Turned out sometimes the short cut dont lead quite where you hoped and cuts through bloody country too.
Just the rumour o gold turns em mad. Wist took another swallow the knobble on his scrawny neck bobbing and watched two would-be prospectors wrestle over the last pickaxe at a stall while the trader struggled vainly to calm them. Imagine how these bastardsll act if they ever close hands around a nugget.
Shy didnt have to imagine. Shed seen it and didnt prize the memories. Men dont need much beckoning on to act like animals.
Nor women neither added Wist.
Shy narrowed her eyes at him. Why look at me?
Youre foremost in my mind.
Not sure I like being that close to your face.
Wist showed her his tombstone teeth as he laughed and handed her the bottle. Why dont you got a man Shy?
Dont like men much I guess.
You dont like anyone much.
They started it.
All of em?
Enough of em. She gave the mouth of the bottle a good wipe and made sure she took only a sip. She knew how easy she could turn a sip into a swallow and the swallow into a bottle and the bottle into waking up smelling of piss with one leg in the creek. There were folk counting on her and shed had her fill of being a disappointment.
The wrestlers had been dragged apart and were spitting insults each in their own tongue neither quite catching the details but both getting the gist. Looked like the pick had vanished in the commotion moren likely spirited away by a cannier adventurer while eyes were elsewhere.
Gold surely can turn men mad muttered Wist all wistful as his name implied. Still if the ground opened and offered me the good stuff I dont suppose Id be turning down a nugget.
Shy thought of the farm and all the tasks to do and all the time she hadnt got for the doing of em and rubbed her roughed-up thumbs against her chewed-up fingers. For the quickest moment a trek into the hills didnt sound such a mad notion after all. What if there really was gold up there? Scattered on some stream bed in priceless abundance longing for the kiss of her itchy fingertips? Shy South luckiest woman in the Near Country…
Hah. She slapped the thought away like a bothersome fly. High hopes were luxuries she couldnt stretch to. In my experience the ground aint giving aught away. No moren the rest of us misers.
Got a lot do you?
Eh?
Experience.
She winked as she handed his bottle back. Moren you can imagine old man. A damn stretch moren most of the pioneers that was sure. Shy shook her head as she watched the latest crowd coming through—a set of Union worthies by their looks dressed for a picnic rather than a slog across a few hundred miles of lawless empty. Folk who shouldve been satisfied with the comfortable lives they had suddenly deciding theyd take any chance at grabbing more. Shy wondered how long itd be before they were limping back the other way broken and broke. If they made it back.
Wheres Gully at? asked Wist.
Back on the farm looking to my brother and sister.
Havent seen him in a while.
He aint been here in a while. Hurts him to ride he says.
Getting old. Happens to us all. When you see him tell him I miss him.
If he was here hed have drunk your bottle dry in one swallow and youd be cursing his name.
I daresay. Wist sighed. Thats how it is with things missed.
By then Lamb was fording the people-flooded street shag of grey hair showing above the heads around him for all his stoop an even sorrier set to his heavy shoulders than usual.
What did you get? she asked hopping down from the wagon.
Lamb winced like he knew what was coming. Twenty-seven? His rumble of a voice tweaked high at the end to make a question of it but what he was really asking was How bad did I fuck up?
Shy shook her head tongue wedged in her cheek letting him know hed fucked up middling to bad. Youre some kind of a bloody coward Lamb. She thumped at the sacks and sent up a puff of grain dust. I didnt spend two days dragging this up here to give it away.
He winced a bit more grey-bearded face creasing around the old scars and laughter lines all weather-worn and dirt-grained. Im no good with the bartering Shy you know that.
Remind me what it is yare good with? she tossed over her shoulder as she strode for Clays Exchange letting a set of piebald goats bleat past then slipping through the traffic sideways-on. Except hauling the sacks?
Thats something aint it? he muttered.
The store was busier even than the street smelling of sawn wood and spices and hard-working bodies packed tight. She had to shove between a clerk and some blackern black Southerner trying to make himself understood in no language shed ever heard before then around a washboard hung from the low rafters and set swinging by a careless elbow then past a frowning Ghost his red hair all bound up with twigs leaves still on and everything. All these folk scrambling west meant money to be made and woe to the merchant tried to put himself between Shy and her share.
Clay? she bellowed nothing to be gained by whispering. Clay!
The trader frowned up caught in the midst of weighing flour out on his man-high scales. Shy South in Squaredeal. Aint this my lucky day.
Looks that way. You got a whole town full o saps to swindle! She gave the last word a bit of air made a few heads turn and Clay plant his big fists on his hips.
No ones swindling no one he said.
Not while Ive got an eye on business.
Me and your father agreed on twenty-seven Shy.
You know he aint my father. And you know you aint agreed shit til Ive agreed it.
Clay cocked an eyebrow at Lamb and the Northman looked straight to the ground shifting sideways like he was trying and wholly failing to vanish. For all Lambs bulk hed a weak eye slapped down by any glance that held it. He could be a loving man and a hard worker and hed been a fair stand-in for a father to Ro and Pit and Shy too far as shed given him the chance. A good enough man but by the dead he was some kind of coward.
Shy felt ashamed for him and ashamed of him and that nettled her. She stabbed her finger in Clays face like it was a drawn dagger shed no qualms about using. Squaredeals a strange sort o name for a town where youd claw out a business! You paid twenty-eight last season and you didnt have a quarter of the customers. Ill take thirty-eight.
What? Clays voice squeaking even higher than shed predicted. Golden grain is it?
Thats right. Top quality. Threshed with my own blistered bloody hands.
And mine muttered Lamb.
Shush said Shy. Ill take thirty-eight and refuse to be moved.
Dont do me no favours! raged Clay fat face filling with angry creases. Because I loved your mother Ill offer twenty nine.
You never loved a thing but your purse. Anything short of thirty-eight and Id sooner set up next to your store and offer all this through-traffic just a little less than what youre offering.
He knew shed do it even if it cost her. Never make a threat you arent at least halfway sure youll carry through on. Thirty-one he grated out.
Thirty-five.
Youre holding up all these good folk you selfish bitch! Or rather she was giving the good folk notice of the profits he was chiselling and sooner or later theyd catch on.
Theyre scum to a man and Ill hold em up til Juvens gets back from the land of the dead if it means thirty-five.
Thirty-two.
Thirty-five.
Thirty-three and you might as well burn my store down on the way out!
Dont tempt me fat man. Thirty-three and you can toss in a pair o those new shovels and some feed for my oxen. They eat almost as much as you. She spat in her palm and held it out.
Clay bitterly worked his mouth but he spat all the same and they shook. Your mother was no better.
Couldnt stand the woman. Shy elbowed her way back towards the door leaving Clay to vent his upset on his next customer. Not that hard is it? she tossed over her shoulder at Lamb.
The big old Northman fussed with the notch out of his ear. Think Id rather have settled for the twenty-seven.
Thats cause youre some kind of a bloody coward. Better to do it than live with the fear of it. Aint that what you always used to tell me?
Times shown me the downside o that advice muttered Lamb but Shy was too busy congratulating herself.
Thirty-three was a good price. Shed worked over the sums and thirty-three would leave something towards Ros books once theyd fixed the barns leaking roof and got a breeding pair of pigs to replace the ones theyd butchered in winter. Maybe they could stretch to some seed too try and nurse the cabbage patch back to health. She was grinning thinking on what she could put right with that money what she could build.
You dont need a big dream her mother used to tell her when she was in a rare good mood a little one will do it.
Lets get them sacks shifted she said.
He mightve been getting on in years mightve been slow as an old favourite cow but Lamb was strong as ever. No weight would bend the man. All Shy had to do was stand on the wagon and heft the sacks one by one onto his shoulders while he stood complaining less than the wagon had at the load. Then hed stroll them across four at a time and stack them in Clays yard easy as sacks of feathers. Shy mightve been half his weight but had the easier task and twenty-five years advantage and still soon enough she was leaking water faster than a fresh-dug well vest plastered to her back and hair to her face arms pink-chafed by canvas and white-powdered with grain dust tongue wedged in the gap between her teeth while she cursed up a storm.
Lamb stood there two sacks over one shoulder and one over the other hardly even breathing hard those deep laugh lines striking out from the corners of his eyes. Need a rest Shy?
She gave him a look. A rest from your carping.
I could shift some o those sacks around and make a little cot for you. Might be theres a blanket in the back there. I could sing you to sleep like I did when you were young.
Im still young.
Ish. Sometimes I think about that little girl smiling up at me. Lamb looked off into the distance shaking his head. And I wonder—where did me and your mother go wrong?
She died and youre useless? Shy heaved the last sack up and dropped it on his shoulder from as great a height as she could manage.
Lamb only grinned as he slapped his hand down on top. Maybe thats it. As he turned he nearly barged into another Northman big as he was and a lot meaner-looking. The man started growling some curse then stopped in the midst. Lamb kept trudging head down how he always did from the least breath of trouble. The Northman frowned up at Shy.
What? she said staring right back.
He frowned after Lamb then walked off scratching at his beard.
The shadows were getting long and the clouds pink in the west when Shy dumped the last sack under Clays grinning face and he held out the money leather bag dangling from one thick forefinger by the drawstrings. She stretched her back out wiped her forehead on the back of one glove then worked the bag open and peered inside.
All here?
Im not going to rob you.
Damn right youre not. And she set to counting it. You can always tell a thief her mother used to say on account of all the care they take with their own money.
Maybe I should go through every sack make sure theres grain in em not shit?
Shy snorted. If it was shit would that stop you selling it?
The merchant sighed. Have it your way.
I will.
She does tend to added Lamb.
A pause with just the clicking of coins and the turning of numbers in her head. Heard Glama Golden won another fight in the pit up near Greyer said Clay. They say hes the toughest bastard in the Near Country and theres some tough bastards about. Take a fool to bet against him now whatever the odds. Take a fool to fight him.
No doubt muttered Lamb always quiet when violence was the subject.
Heard from a man watched it he beat old Stockling Bear so hard his guts came out of his arse.
Thats entertainment is it? asked Shy.
Beats shitting your own guts.
That aint much of a review.
Clay shrugged. Ive heard worse ones. Did you hear about this battle up near Rostod?
Something about it she muttered trying to keep her count straight.
Rebels got beat again I heard. Bad this time. All on the run now. Those the Inquisition didnt get a hold on.
Poor bastards said Lamb.
Shy paused her count a moment then carried on. There were a lot of poor bastards about but they couldnt all be her problem. Shed enough worries with her brother and sister and Lamb and Gully and the farm without crying over others self-made misfortunes.
Might be theyll make a stand up at Mulkova but they wont be standing long. Clay made the fence creak as he leaned his soft bulk back on it hands tucked under his armpits with the thumbs sticking up. Wars all but over if you can call it a war and theres plenty of people shook off their land. Shook off or burned out or lost what they had. Passes are opened up ships coming through. Lots of folk seeing their fortune out west all of a sudden. He nodded at the dusty chaos in the street still boiling over even as the sun set. This heres just the first trickle. Theres a flood coming.
Lamb sniffed. Like as not theyll find the mountains aint one great piece of gold and soon come flooding back the other way.
Some will. Somell put down roots. The Unionll be coming along after. However much land the Union get they always want more and what with that find out west theyll smell money. That vicious old bastard Sarmis is sitting on the border and rattling his sword for the Empire but his swords always rattling. Wont stop the tide I reckon. Clay took a step closer to Shy and spoke soft like he had secrets to share. I heard tell theres already been Union agents in Hormring talking annexation.
Theyre buying folk out?
Theyll have a coin in one hand sure but theyll have a blade in the other. They always do. We should be thinking about how well play it if they come to Squaredeal. We should stand together those of us been here a while.
I aint interested in politics. Shy wasnt interested in anything might bring trouble.
Most of us arent said Clay but sometimes politics takes an interest in us all the same. The Unionll be coming and theyll bring law with em.
Law dont seem such a bad thing Shy lied.
Maybe not. But taxes follow law quick as the cart behind the donkey.
Cant say Im an enthusiast for taxes.
Just a fancier way to rob a body aint it? Id rather be thieved honest with mask and dagger than have some bloodless bastard come at me with pen and paper.
Dont know about that muttered Shy. None of those shed robbed had looked too delighted with the experience and some a lot less than others. She let the coins slide back into the bag and drew the string tight.
Hows the count? asked Clay. Anything missing?
Not this time. But I reckon Ill keep watching just the same.
The merchant grinned. Id expect no less.
She picked out a few things they needed—salt vinegar some sugar since it only came in time to time a wedge of dried beef half a bag of nails which brought the predictable joke from Clay that she was half a bag of nails herself which brought the predictable joke from her that shed nail his fruits to his leg which brought the predictable joke from Lamb that Clays fruits were so small she might not get a nail through. They had a bit of a chuckle over each others quick wits.
She almost got carried away and bought a new shirt for Pit which was moren they could afford good price or other price but Lamb patted her arm with his gloved hand and she bought needles and thread instead so she could make him a shirt from one of Lambs old ones. She probably couldve made five shirts for Pit from one of Lambs the boy was that skinny. The needles were a new kind Clay said were stamped out of a machine in Adua hundreds at a press and Shy smiled as she thought what Gully would say to that shaking his white head at them and saying needles from a machine whatll be thought of next while Ro turned them over and over in her quick fingers frowning down as she worked out how it was done.
Shy paused in front of the spirits to lick her lips a moment glass gleaming amber in the darkness then forced herself on without haggled harder than ever with Clay over his prices and they were finished.
Never come to this store again you mad bitch! The trader hurled at her as she climbed up onto the wagons seat alongside Lamb. Youve damn near ruined me!
Next season?
He waved a fat hand as he turned back to his customers. Aye see you then.
She reached to take the brake off and almost put her hand in the beard of the Northman Lamb knocked into earlier. He was standing right beside the wagon brow all ploughed up like he was trying to bring some foggy memory to mind thumbs tucked into a sword-belt—big simple hilt close to hand. A rough style of character a scar born near one eye and jagged through his scraggy beard. Shy kept a pleasant look on her face as she eased her knife out spinning the blade about so it was hidden behind her arm. Better to have steel to hand and find no trouble than find yourself in trouble with no steel to hand.
The Northman said something in his own tongue. Lamb hunched a little lower in his seat not even turning to look. The Northman spoke again. Lamb grunted something back then snapped the reins and the wagon rolled off Shy swaying with the jolting wheels. She snatched a glance over her shoulder when theyd gone a few strides down the rutted street. The Northman was still standing in their dust frowning after them.
Whatd he want?
Nothing.
She slid her knife into its sheath stuck one boot on the rail and sat back settling her hat brim low so the setting sun wasnt in her eyes. The worlds brimming over with strange people all right. You spend time worrying what theyre thinking youll be worrying all your life.
Lamb was hunched lower than ever like he was trying to vanish into his own chest.
Shy snorted. Youre such a bloody coward.
He gave her a sideways look then away. Theres worse a man can be.
They were laughing when they clattered over the rise and the shallow little valley opened out in front of them. Something Lamb had said. Hed perked up when they left town as usual. Never at his best in a crowd.
It gave Shys spirits a lift besides coming up that track that was hardly more than two faded lines through the long grass. Shed been through black times in her younger years midnight black times when she thought shed be killed out under the sky and left to rot or caught and hanged and tossed out unburied for the dogs to rip at. More than once in the midst of nights sweated through with fear shed sworn to be grateful every moment of her life if fate gave her the chance to tread this unremarkable path again. Eternal gratitude hadnt quite come about but thats promises for you. She still felt that bit lighter as the wagon rolled home.
Then they saw the farm and the laughter choked in her throat and they sat silent while the wind fumbled through the grass around them. Shy couldnt breathe couldnt speak couldnt think all her veins flushed with ice-water. Then she was down from the wagon and running.
Shy! Lamb roared at her back but she hardly heard head full of her own rattling breath pounding down the slope land and sky jolting around her. Through the stubble of the field theyd harvested not a week before. Over the trampled-down fence and the chicken feathers crushed into the mud.
She made it to the yard—what had been the yard—and stood helpless. The house was all dead charred timbers and rubbish and nothing left standing but the tottering chimney-stack. No smoke. The rain mustve put out the fires a day or two before. But everything was burned out. She ran around the side of the blacked wreck of the barn whimpering a little now with each breath.
Gully was hanged from the big tree out back. Theyd hanged him over her mothers grave and kicked down the headstone. He was shot through with arrows. Mightve been a dozen mightve been more.
Shy felt like she was kicked in the guts and she bent over arms hugged around herself and groaned and the tree groaned with her as the wind shook its leaves and set Gullys corpse gently swinging. Poor old harmless bastard. Hed called to her as theyd rattled off on the wagon. Said she didnt need to worry cause hed look to the children and shed laughed at him and said she didnt need to worry cause the children would look to him and she couldnt see nothing for the aching in her eyes and the wind stinging at them and she clamped her arms tighter feeling suddenly so cold nothing could warm her.
She heard Lambs boots thumping up then slowing then coming steady until he stood beside her.
Where are the children?
They dug the house over and the barn. Slow and steady and numb to begin with. Lamb dragged the scorched timbers clear while Shy scraped through the ashes sure shed scrape up Pit and Ros bones. But they werent in the house. Nor in the barn. Nor in the yard. Wilder now trying to smother her fear and more frantic trying to smother her hope casting through the grass and clawing at the rubbish but the closest Shy came to her brother and sister was a charred toy horse Lamb had whittled for Pit years past and the scorched pages of some of Ros books she let blow through her fingers.
The children were vanished.
She stood there staring into the wind back of one raw hand against her mouth and her chest going hard. Only one thing she could think of.
Theyre stolen she croaked.
Lamb just nodded his grey hair and his grey beard all streaked with soot.
Why?
I dont know.
She wiped her blackened hands on the front of her shirt and made fists of them. Weve got to get after.
Aye.
She squatted down over the chewed-up sod around the tree. Wiped her nose and her eyes. Followed the tracks bent over to another battered patch of ground. She found an empty bottle trampled into the mud tossed it away. Theyd made no effort at hiding their sign. Horse-prints all around circling the shells of the buildings. Im guessing at about twenty. Mightve been forty horses though. They left the spare mounts over here.
To carry the children maybe?
Carry em where?
Lamb just shook his head.
She went on keen to say anything that might fill the space. Keen to set to work at something so she didnt have to think. My way of looking at it they came in from the west and left going south. Left in a hurry.
Ill get the shovels. Well bury Gully.
They did it quick. She shinned up the tree knowing every foot- and handhold. She used to climb it long ago before Lamb came while her mother watched and Gully clapped and now her mother was buried under it and Gully was hanged from it and she knew somehow shed made it happen. You cant bury a past like hers and think youll walk away laughing.
She cut him down and broke the arrows off and smoothed his bloody hair while Lamb dug out a hole next to her mother. She closed his popping eyes and put her hand on his cheek and it was cold. He looked so small now and so thin she wanted to put a coat on him but there was none to hand. Lamb lowered him in a clumsy hug and they filled the hole together and they dragged her mothers stone up straight again and tramped the thrashing grass around it ash blowing on the cold wind in specks of black and grey whipping across the land and off to nowhere.
Should we say something? asked Shy.
Ive nothing to say. Lamb swung himself up onto the wagons seat. Might still have been an hour of light left.
We aint taking that said Shy. I can run fastern those bloody oxen.
Not longer though and not with gear and well do no good rushing at this. Theyve got what? Two three days start on us? And theyll be riding hard. Twenty men you said? We have to be realistic Shy.
Realistic? she whispered at him hardly able to believe it.
If we chase after on foot and dont starve or get washed away in a storm and if we catch em what then? Were not armed even. Not with moren your knife. No. Well follow on fast as Scale and Calder can take us. Nodding at the oxen grazing a little while they had the chance. See if we can pare a couple off the herd. Work out what theyre about.
Clear enough what theyre about! she said pointing at Gullys grave. And what happens to Ro and Pit while were fucking following on? She ended up screaming it at him voice splitting the silence and a couple of hopeful crows taking flight from the trees branches.
The corner of Lambs mouth twitched but he didnt look at her. Well follow. Like it was a fact agreed on. Might be we can talk this out. Buy em back.
Buy em? They burn your farm and they hang your friend and they steal your children and you want to pay em for the privilege? Youre such a fucking coward!
Still he didnt look at her. Sometimes a cowards what you need. His voice was rough. Clicking in his throat. No shed bloods going to unburn this farm now nor unhang Gully neither. Thats done. Best we can do is get back the little ones any way we can. Get em back safe. This time the twitch started at his mouth and scurried all the way up his scarred cheek to the corner of his eye. Then well see.
Shy took a last look as they lurched away towards the setting sun. Her home. Her hopes. How a day can change things about. Naught left but a few scorched timbers poking at the pinking sky. You dont need a big dream. She felt about as low as she ever had in all her life and shed been in some bad dark low-down places. Hardly had the strength all of a sudden to hold her head up.
Whyd they have to burn it all? she whispered.
Some men just like to burn said Lamb.
Shy looked around at him the outline of his battered frown showing below his battered hat the dying sun glimmering in one eye and thought how strange it was that he could be so calm. A man who hadnt the guts to argue over prices thinking death and kidnap through. Being realistic about the end of all theyd worked for.
How can you sit so level? she whispered at him. Like… like you knew it was coming.
Still he didnt look at her. Its always coming.
introducing
If you enjoyed
BAPTISM OF FIRE
look out for
THE BLACK PRISM
Lightbringer: Book 1
by Brent Weeks
Gavin Guile is the Prism the most powerful man in the world. He is high priest and emperor a man whose power wit and charm are all that preserves a tenuous peace. But Prisms never last and Guile knows exactly how long he has left to live: five years to achieve five impossible goals.
But when Guile discovers he has a son born in a far kingdom after the war that put him in power he must decide how much hes willing to pay to protect a secret that could tear his world apart.
CHAPTER ONE
Kip crawled toward the battlefield in the darkness the mist pressing down blotting out sound scattering starlight. Though the adults shunned it and the children were forbidden to come here hed played on the open field a hundred times—during the day. Tonight his purpose was grimmer.
Reaching the top of the hill Kip stood and hiked up his pants. The river behind him was hissing or maybe that was the warriors beneath its surface dead these sixteen years. He squared his shoulders ignoring his imagination. The mists made him seem suspended outside of time. But even if there was no evidence of it the sun was coming. By the time it did he had to get to the far side of the battlefield. Farther than hed ever gone searching.
Even Ramir wouldnt come out here at night. Everyone knew Sundered Rock was haunted. But Ram didnt have to feed his family; his mother didnt smoke her wages.
Gripping his little belt knife tightly Kip started walking. It wasnt just the unquiet dead that might pull him down to the evernight. A pack of giant javelinas had been seen roaming the night tusks cruel hooves sharp. They were good eating if you had a matchlock iron nerves and good aim but since the Prisms War had wiped out all the towns men there werent many people who braved death for a little bacon. Rekton was already a shell of what it had once been. The alcaldesa wasnt eager for any of her townspeople to throw their lives away. Besides Kip didnt have a matchlock.
Nor were javelinas the only creatures that roamed the night. A mountain lion or a golden bear would also probably enjoy a well-marbled Kip.
A low howl cut the mist and the darkness hundreds of paces deeper into the battlefield. Kip froze. Oh there were wolves too. Howd he forget wolves?
Another wolf answered farther out. A haunting sound the very voice of the wilderness. You couldnt help but freeze when you heard it. It was the kind of beauty that made you shit your pants.
Wetting his lips Kip got moving. He had the distinct sensation of being followed. Stalked. He looked over his shoulder. There was nothing there. Of course. His mother always said he had too much imagination. Just walk Kip. Places to be. Animals are more scared of you and all that. Besides that was one of the tricks about a howl it always sounded much closer than it really was. Those wolves were probably leagues away.
Before the Prisms War this had been excellent farmland. Right next to the Umber River suitable for figs grapes pears dewberries asparagus—everything grew here. And it had been sixteen years since the final battle—a year before Kip was even born. But the plain was still torn and scarred. A few burnt timbers of old homes and barns poked out of the dirt. Deep furrows and craters remained from cannon shells. Filled now with swirling mist those craters looked like lakes tunnels traps. Bottomless. Unfathomable.
Most of the magic used in the battle had dissolved sooner or later in the years of sun exposure but here and there broken green luxin spears still glittered. Shards of solid yellow underfoot would cut through the toughest shoe leather.
Scavengers had long since taken all the valuable arms mail and luxin from the battlefield but as the seasons passed and rains fell more mysteries surfaced each year. That was what Kip was hoping for—and what he was seeking was most visible in the first rays of dawn.
The wolves stopped howling. Nothing was worse than hearing that chilling sound but at least with the sound he knew where they were. Now… Kip swallowed on the hard knot in his throat.
As he walked in the valley of the shadow of two great unnatural hills—the remnant of two of the great funeral pyres where tens of thousands had burned—Kip saw something in the mist. His heart leapt into his throat. The curve of a mail cowl. A glint of eyes searching the darkness.
Then it was swallowed up in the roiling mists.
A ghost. Dear Orholam. Some spirit keeping watch at its grave.
Look on the bright side. Maybe wolves are scared of ghosts.
Kip realized hed stopped walking peering into the darkness. Move fathead.
He moved keeping low. He might be big but he prided himself on being light on his feet. He tore his eyes away from the hill—still no sign of the ghost or man or whatever it was. He had that feeling again that he was being stalked. He looked back. Nothing.
A quick click like someone dropping a small stone. And something at the corner of his eye. Kip shot a look up the hill. A click a spark the striking of flint against steel.
The mists illuminated for that briefest moment Kip saw few details. Not a ghost—a soldier striking a flint trying to light a slow-match. It caught fire casting a red glow on the soldiers face making his eyes seem to glow. He affixed the slow-match to the match-holder of his matchlock and spun looking for targets in the darkness.
His night vision must have been ruined by staring at the brief flame on his match now a smoldering red ember because his eyes passed right over Kip.
The soldier turned again sharply paranoid. The hell am I supposed to see out here anyway? Swivin wolves.
Very very carefully Kip started walking away. He had to get deeper into the mist and darkness before the soldiers night vision recovered but if he made noise the man might fire blindly. Kip walked on his toes silently his back itching sure that a lead ball was going to tear through him at any moment.
But he made it. A hundred paces more and no one yelled. No shot cracked the night. Farther. Two hundred paces more and he saw light off to his left a campfire. It had burned so low it was barely more than coals now. Kip tried not to look directly at it to save his vision. There was no tent no bedrolls nearby just the fire.
Kip tried Master Danaviss trick for seeing in darkness. He let his focus relax and tried to view things from the periphery of his vision. Nothing but an irregularity perhaps. He moved closer.
Two men lay on the cold ground. One was a soldier. Kip had seen his mother unconscious plenty of times; he knew instantly this man wasnt passed out. He was sprawled unnaturally there were no blankets and his mouth hung open slack-jawed eyes staring unblinking at the night. Next to the dead soldier lay another man bound in chains but alive. He lay on his side hands manacled behind his back a black bag over his head and cinched tight around his neck.
The prisoner was alive trembling. No weeping. Kip looked around; there was no one else in sight.
Why dont you just finish it damn you? the prisoner said.
Kip froze. He thought hed approached silently.
Coward the prisoner said. Just following your orders I suppose? Orholam will smite you for what youre about to do to that little town.
Kip had no idea what the man was talking about.
Apparently his silence spoke for him.
Youre not one of them. A note of hope entered the prisoners voice. Please help me!
Kip stepped forward. The man was suffering. Then he stopped. Looked at the dead soldier. The front of the soldiers shirt was soaked with blood. Had this prisoner killed him? How?
Please leave me chained if you must. But please I dont want to die in darkness.
Kip stayed back though it felt cruel. You killed him?
Im supposed to be executed at first light. I got away. He chased me down and got the bag over my head before he died. If dawns close his replacement is coming anytime now.
Kip still wasnt putting it together. No one in Rekton trusted the soldiers who came through and the alcaldesa had told the towns young people to give any soldiers a wide berth for a while—apparently the new satrap Garadul had declared himself free of the Chromerias control. Now he was King Garadul he said but he wanted the usual levies from the towns young people. The alcaldesa had told his representative that if he wasnt the satrap anymore he didnt have the right to raise levies. King or satrap Garadul couldnt be happy with that but Rekton was too small to bother with. Still it would be wise to avoid his soldiers until this all blew over.
On the other hand just because Rekton wasnt getting along with the satrap right now didnt make this man Kips friend.
So you are a criminal? Kip asked.
Of six shades to Sun Day the man said. The hope leaked out of his voice. Look boy—you are a child arent you? You sound like one. Im going to die today. I cant get away. Truth to tell I dont want to. Ive run enough. This time I fight.
I dont understand.
You will. Take off my hood.
Though some vague doubt nagged Kip he untied the half-knot around the mans neck and pulled off the hood.
At first Kip had no idea what the prisoner was talking about. The man sat up arms still bound behind his back. He was perhaps thirty years old Tyrean like Kip but with a lighter complexion his hair wavy rather than kinky his limbs thin and muscular. Then Kip saw his eyes.
Men and women who could harness light and make luxin—drafters—always had unusual eyes. A little residue of whatever color they drafted ended up in their eyes. Over the course of their life it would stain the entire iris red or blue or whatever their color was. The prisoner was a green drafter—or had been. Instead of the green being bound in a halo within the iris it was shattered like crockery smashed to the floor. Little green fragments glowed even in the whites of his eyes. Kip gasped and shrank back.
Please! the man said. Please the madness isnt on me. I wont hurt you.
Youre a color wight.
And now you know why I ran away from the Chromeria the man said.
Because the Chromeria put down color wights like a farmer put down a beloved rabid dog.
Kip was on the verge of bolting but the man wasnt making any threatening moves. And besides it was still dark. Even color wights needed light to draft. The mist did seem lighter though gray beginning to touch the horizon. It was crazy to talk to a madman but maybe it wasnt too crazy. At least until dawn.
The color wight was looking at Kip oddly. Blue eyes. He laughed.
Kip scowled. He hated his blue eyes. It was one thing when a foreigner like Master Danavis had blue eyes. They looked fine on him. Kip looked freakish.
Whats your name? the color wight asked.
Kip swallowed thinking he should probably run away.
Oh for Orholams sake you think Im going to hex you with your name? How ignorant is this backwater? That isnt how chromaturgy works—
Kip.
The color wight grinned. Kip. Well Kip have you ever wondered why you were stuck in such a small life? Have you ever gotten the feeling Kip that youre special?
Kip said nothing. Yes and yes.
Do you know why you feel destined for something greater?
Why? Kip asked quiet hopeful.
Because youre an arrogant little shit. The color wight laughed.
Kip shouldnt have been taken off guard. His mother had said worse. Still it took him a moment. A small failure. Burn in hell coward he said. Youre not even good at running away. Caught by ironfoot soldiers.
The color wight laughed louder. Oh they didnt catch me. They recruited me.
Who would recruit madmen to join them? They didnt know you were a—
Oh they knew.
Dread like a weight dropped into Kips stomach. You said something about my town. Before. What are they planning to do?
You know Orholams got a sense of humor. Never realized that till now. Orphan arent you?
No. Ive got a mother Kip said. He instantly regretted giving the color wight even that much.
Would you believe me if I told you theres a prophecy about you?
It wasnt funny the first time Kip said. Whats going to happen to my town? Dawn was coming and Kip wasnt going to stick around. Not only would the guards replacement come then but Kip had no idea what the wight would do once he had light.
You know the wight said youre the reason Im here. Not here here. Not like Why do I exist? Not in Tyrea. In chains I mean.
What? Kip asked.
Theres power in madness Kip. Of course… He trailed off laughed at a private thought. Recovered. Look that soldier has a key in his breast pocket. I couldnt get it out not with— He shook his hands bound and manacled behind his back.
And I would help you why? Kip asked.
For a few straight answers before dawn.
Crazy and cunning. Perfect. Give me one first Kip said.
Shoot.
Whats the plan for Rekton?
Fire.
What? Kip asked.
Sorry you said one answer.
That was no answer!
Theyre going to wipe out your village. Make an example so no one else defies King Garadul. Other villages defied the king too of course. His rebellion against the Chromeria isnt popular everywhere. For every town burning to take vengeance on the Prism theres another that wants nothing to do with war. Your village was chosen specially. Anyway I had a little spasm of conscience and objected. Words were exchanged. I punched my superior. Not totally my fault. They know us greens dont do rules and hierarchy. Especially not once weve broken the halo. The color wight shrugged. There straight. I think that deserves the key dont you?
It was too much information to soak up at once—broken the halo?—but it was a straight answer. Kip walked over to the dead man. His skin was pallid in the rising light. Pull it together Kip. Ask whatever you need to ask.
Kip could tell that dawn was coming. Eerie shapes were emerging from the night. The great twin looming masses of Sundered Rock itself were visible mostly as a place where stars were blotted out of the sky.
What do I need to ask?
He was hesitating not wanting to touch the dead man. He knelt. Why my town? He poked through the dead mans pocket careful not to touch skin. It was there two keys.
They think you have something that belongs to the king. I dont know what. I only picked up that much by eavesdropping.
What would Rekton have that the king wants? Kip asked.
Not Rekton you. You you.
It took Kip a second. He touched his own chest. Me? Me personally? I dont even own anything!
The color wight gave a crazy grin but Kip thought it was a pretense. Tragic mistake then. Their mistake your tragedy.
What you think Im lying?! Kip asked. You think Id be out here scavenging luxin if I had any other choice?
I dont really care one way or the other. You going to bring that key over here or do I need to ask real nice?
It was a mistake to bring the keys over. Kip knew it. The color wight wasnt stable. He was dangerous. Hed admitted as much. But he had kept his word. How could Kip do less?
Kip unlocked the mans manacles and then the padlock on the chains. He backed away carefully as one would from a wild animal. The color wight pretended not to notice simply rubbing his arms and stretching back and forth. He moved over to the guard and poked through his pockets again. His hand emerged with a pair of green spectacles with one cracked lens.
You could come with me Kip said. If what you said is true—
How close do you think Id get to your town before someone came running with a musket? Besides once the sun comes up… Im ready for it to be done. The color wight took a deep breath staring at the horizon. Tell me Kip if youve done bad things your whole life but you die doing something good do you think that makes up for all the bad?
No Kip said honestly before he could stop himself.
Me neither.
But its better than nothing Kip said. Orholam is merciful.
Wonder if youll say that after theyre done with your village.
There were other questions Kip wanted to ask but everything had happened in such a rush that he couldnt put his thoughts together.
In the rising light Kip saw what had been hidden in the fog and the darkness. Hundreds of tents were laid out in military precision. Soldiers. Lots of soldiers. And even as Kip stood not two hundred paces from the nearest tent the plain began winking. Glimmers sparkled as broken luxin gleamed like stars scattered on the ground answering their brethren in the sky.
It was what Kip had come for. Usually when a drafter released luxin it simply dissolved no matter what color it was. But in battle there had been so much chaos so many drafters some sealed magic had been buried and protected from the sunlight that would break it down. The recent rain had uncovered more.
But Kips eyes were pulled from the winking luxin by four soldiers and a man with a stark red cloak and red spectacles walking toward them from the camp.
My name is Gaspar by the by. Gaspar Elos. The color wight didnt look at Kip.
What?
Im not just some drafter. My father loved me. I had plans. A girl. A life.
I dont—
You will. The color wight put the green spectacles on; they fit perfectly tight to his face lenses sweeping to either side so that wherever he looked he would be looking through a green filter. Now get out of here.
As the sun touched the horizon Gaspar sighed. It was as if Kip had ceased to exist. It was like watching his mother take that first deep breath of haze. Between the sparkling spars of darker green the whites of Gaspars eyes swirled like droplets of green blood hitting water first dispersing then staining the whole. The emerald green of luxin ballooned through his eyes thickened until it was solid and then spread. Through his cheeks up to his hairline then down his neck standing out starkly when it finally filled his lighter fingernails as if theyd been painted in radiant jade.
Gaspar started laughing. It was a low unreasoning cackle unrelenting. Mad. Not a pretense this time.
Kip ran.
He reached the funerary hill where the sentry had been taking care to stay on the far side from the army. He had to get to Master Danavis. Master Danavis always knew what to do.
There was no sentry on the hill now. Kip turned around in time to see Gaspar change transform. Green luxin spilled out of his hands onto his body covering every part of him like a shell like an enormous suit of armor. Kip couldnt see the soldiers or the red drafter approaching Gaspar but he did see a fireball the size of his head streak toward the color wight hit his chest and burst apart throwing flames everywhere.
Gaspar rammed through it flaming red luxin sticking to his green armor. He was magnificent terrible powerful. He ran toward the soldiers screaming defiance and disappeared from Kips view.
Kip fled the vermilion sun setting fire to the mists.
CHAPTER TWO
Gavin Guile sleepily eyed the papers that slid under his door and wondered what Karris was punishing him for this time. His rooms occupied half of the top floor of the Chromeria but the panoramic windows were blackened so that if he slept at all he could sleep in. The seal on the letter pulsed so gently that Gavin couldnt tell what color had been drafted into it. He propped himself up in bed so he could get a better look and dilated his pupils to gather as much light as possible.
Superviolet. Oh sonuva—
On every side the floor-to-ceiling blackened windows dropped into the floor bathing the room in full-spectrum light as the morning sun was revealed climbing the horizon over the dual islands. With his eyes dilated so far magic flooded Gavin. It was too much to hold.
Light exploded from him in every direction passing through him in successive waves from superviolet down. The sub-red was last rushing through his skin like a wave of flame. He jumped out of bed sweating instantly. But with all the windows open cold summer morning winds blasted through his chambers chilling him. He yelped hopping back into bed.
His yelp must have been loud enough for Karris to hear it and know that her rude awakening had been successful because he heard her unmistakable laugh. She wasnt a superviolet so she must have had a friend help her with her little prank. A quick shot of superviolet luxin at the rooms controls threw the windows closed and set the filters to half. Gavin extended a hand to blast his door open then stopped. He wasnt going to give Karris the satisfaction. Her assignment to be the Whites fetch-and-carry girl had ostensibly been intended to teach her humility and gravitas. So far that much had been a spectacular failure though the White always played a deeper game. Still Gavin couldnt help grinning as he rose and swept the folded papers Karris had tucked under the door into his hand.
He walked to his door. On a small service table just outside he found his breakfast on a platter. It was the same every morning: two squat bricks of bread and a pale wine in a clear glass cup. The bread was made of wheat barley beans lentils millet and spelt unleavened. A man could live on that bread. In fact a man was living on that bread. Just not Gavin. Indeed the sight of it made his stomach turn. He could order a different breakfast of course but he never did.
He brought it inside setting the papers on the table next to the bread. One was odd a plain note that didnt look like the Whites personal stationery nor any official hard white stationery the Chromeria used. He turned it over. The Chromerias message office had marked it as being received from ST Rekton: Satrapy of Tyrea town of Rekton. It sounded familiar maybe one of those towns near Sundered Rock? But then there had once been so many towns there. Probably someone begging an audience though those letters were supposed to be screened out and dealt with separately.
Still first things first. He tore open each loaf checking that nothing had been concealed inside it. Satisfied he took out a bottle of the blue dye he kept in a drawer and dribbled a bit into the wine. He swirled the wine to mix it and held the glass up against the granite blue sky of a painting he kept on the wall as his reference.
Hed done it perfectly of course. Hed been doing this for almost six thousand mornings now. Almost sixteen years. A long time for a man only thirty-three years old. He poured the wine over the broken halves of the bread staining it blue—and harmless. Once a week Gavin would prepare a blue cheese or blue fruit but it took more time.
He picked up the note from Tyrea.
Im dying Gavin. Its time you meet your son Kip.—Lina
Son? I dont have a—
Suddenly his throat clamped down and his chest felt like his heart was seizing up no matter that the chirurgeons said it wasnt. Just relax they said. Young and strong as a warhorse they said. They didnt say Grow a pair. Youve got lots of friends your enemies fear you and you have no rivals. Youre the Prism. What are you afraid of? No one had talked to him that way in years. Sometimes he wished they would.
Orholam the note hadnt even been sealed.
Gavin walked out onto his glass balcony subconsciously checking his drafting as he did every morning. He stared at his hand splitting sunlight into its component colors as only he could do filling each finger in turn with a color from below the visible spectrum to above it: sub-red red orange yellow green blue superviolet. Had he felt a hitch there when he drafted blue? He double-checked it glancing briefly toward the sun.
No it was still easy to split light still flawless. He released the luxin each color sliding out and dissipating like smoke from beneath his fingernails releasing the familiar bouquet of resinous scents.
He turned his face to the sun its warmth like a mothers caress. Gavin opened his eyes and sucked in a warm soothing red. In and out in time with his labored breaths willing them to slow. Then he let the red go and took in a deep icy blue. It felt like it was freezing his eyes. As ever the blue brought clarity peace order. But not a plan not with so little information. He let go of the colors. He was still fine. He still had at least five of his seven years left. Plenty of time. Five years five great purposes.
Well maybe not five great purposes.
Still of his predecessors in the last four hundred years aside from those whod been assassinated or died of other causes the rest had served for exactly seven fourteen or twenty-one years after becoming Prism. Gavin had made it past fourteen. So plenty of time. No reason to think hed be the exception. Not many anyway.
He picked up the second note. Cracking the Whites seal—the old crone sealed everything though she shared the other half of this floor and Karris hand-delivered her messages. But everything had to be in its proper place properly done. There was no mistaking that shed risen from Blue.
The Whites note read Unless you would prefer to greet the students arriving late this morning my dear Lord Prism please attend me on the roof.
Looking beyond the Chromerias buildings and the city Gavin studied the merchant ships in the bay cupped in the lee of Big Jasper Island. A ragged-looking Atashian sloop was maneuvering in to dock directly at a pier.
Greeting new students. Unbelievable. It wasnt that he was too good to greet new students—well actually it was that. He the White and the Spectrum were supposed to balance each other. But though the Spectrum feared him the most the reality was that the crone got her way more often than Gavin and the seven Colors combined. This morning she had to be wanting to experiment on him again and if he wanted to avoid something more onerous like teaching hed better get to the top of the tower.
Gavin drafted his red hair into a tight ponytail and dressed in the clothes his room slave had laid out for him: an ivory shirt and a wellcut pair of black wool pants with an oversize gemstudded belt boots with silverwork and a black cloak with harsh old Ilytian runic designs embroidered in silver thread. The Prism belonged to all the satrapies so Gavin did his best to honor the traditions of every land—even one that was mainly pirates and heretics.
He hesitated a moment then pulled open a drawer and drew out his brace of Ilytian pistols. They were typical for Ilytian work the most advanced design Gavin had ever seen. The firing mechanism was far more reliable than a wheellock—they were calling it a flintlock. Each pistol had a long blade beneath the barrel and even a beltflange so that when he tucked them into his belt behind his back they were held securely and at an angle so he didnt skewer himself when he sat. The Ilytians thought of everything.
And of course the pistols made the Whites Blackguards nervous. Gavin grinned.
When he turned for the door and saw the painting again his grin dropped.
He walked back to the table with the blue bread. Grabbing one use-smoothened edge of the painting he pulled. It swung open silently revealing a narrow chute.
Nothing menacing about the chute. Too small for a man to climb up even if he overcame everything else. It might have been a laundry chute. Yet to Gavin it looked like the mouth of hell the evernight itself opening wide for him. He tossed one of the bricks of bread into it then waited. There was a thunk as the hard bread hit the first lock a small hiss as it opened then closed then a smaller thunk as it hit the next lock and a few moments later one last thunk. Each of the locks was still working. Everything was normal. Safe. There had been mistakes over the years but no one had to die this time. No need for paranoia. He nearly snarled as he slammed the painting closed.